La version dérécursivée avec une pile de l’algorithme A, non récursif terminal, est comme
suit:
On définit new et end, deux symboles distincts, indiquant si l’on empile le début d’un nouvel
appel, ou le retour d’un ancien.
def A(x):
if C:
I ; A(τx) ; F
else:
T
devient
def A(x):
calls = [new,x]
#pile d’appels.
ret = None
# valeur de retour
while calls:
x = calls.pop()
# on recupere les arguments de l’appel
state = calls.pop()
if state == new:
# nouvel appel; on traite le debut de A
if C:
I
calls.extend((end,x))
# quand on aura fini l’appel recursif qui suit,
# il faudra terminer cet appel: il reste F
# On stocke le contexte d’ex\’ecution
# ici, le parametre de la fonction
calls.extend((new,τx))
# On lance un nouvel appel A(τx)
else:
T
# les return sont traites
# comme une affectation a ret
elif state == end:
# fin d’ancien appel a terminer
F # meme remarque que pour T
return ret
(261) ♣Dérécursiver la fonction factorial de la question 205 en utilisant le patron ci-dessus.
(262) ♣Que faire pour les récursivités multiples, mutuelles, ou imbriquées ?
378
Part VI
Python Project 2025–2026: MedievAIl
BAIttle GenerAIl
pyproj2526_generail.tex WORK IN PROGRESS !
Short version: implement a medieval battle simulator capable (hopefully) of sophisticated tactics.
The context in a nutshell: Age of Empires (2) (AOE) is a medieval-themed RTS (cf. Sec. 74[p399]:
“What is an RTS / AoE?”). I’m rather fond of it, both as a game and as an bottomless well of
ideas for Python projects. Although 2021 and 2024’s projects (bt) were also inspired by AOE,
all three have different focuses and present very different challenges. You won’t gain much
from reusing code from last year.
68
Scope of the project
Whereas previous projects covered both economic and military aspects, with and without
user interaction, with the goal of imitating a small subset of AOE, this year’s goal is to focus
exclusively on AI battles, without any user interaction, base building, economy, or unit
production, and to exceed the performance of AOE in that regard. Basically you will write
artificial generals, give them command of equal armies, and may the best AI win.
The AOE AI is terrible in this regard.
The principle of AOE is to balance the player’s attention between building an economy
(villagers gathering resources and erecting buildings), training an army (units produced
from specific buildings, at the cost of time and resources), and managing the armies in battle.
The AI in AOE is simultaneously absolutely godlike and utterly pathetic.
It is godlike, because it always pays attention to everything at the same time.
A human player is doing one thing at a time. When he is micromanaging a battle, he is
not reassigning his villagers towards new resources and rebuilding his base that just got
destroyed and building a new military complex to prepare for the switch to a different kind
of unit that counters the enemy’s.
The AI is always micromanaging each of its (up to 200) units at all time. If you give the AI
infinite resources and instant construction and conscription time, it can and will turn three
(bt)Sec. VIII[p399]: “Archived Python Project 2024–2025: AIge of EmpAIres”, Sec. XI[p424]: “Archived Python
Project 2021–2022: Age of Cheap Empires”
379
villagers into a heavily fortified base covering half the map and spewing a constant stream
of hundreds varied units in twenty seconds flat. And while it’s doing all that, if you fire an
arrow at some random villager, it will casually move the villager to sidestep the arrow.
It is also programmed to implement the optimised openings developed by the expert players
of AOE2 over 25 years.
It is pathetic, because the massive armies which its economy can sustain are usually streamed
as a constant diarrhoea of units spewed in utter disorder at whichever point it’s decided to
attack, with complete disregard for common sense and survival, let alone tactics.
Combat in AOE is a game of counters; almost of rock-paper-scissors.
Cavalry counters archers, because it’s fast, tanky, and hits hard, so it charges, gets up close
and massacres the squishy archers. Infantry counters cavalry, because they’re cheaper, so
you have more of them. Archers counter infantry, because they aren’t too tanky and are
quite slow and take a lot of damage before getting close.
It gets more complicated, because there are many types of units within those categories,
each with different HP, armor (melee or pierce), and bonus damage.
For instance, pikemen are a very weak infantry unit generally, but they do massive extra
damage against cavalry.
Skirmishers are very weak archer-like units, but they have high pierce armor (defending
against arrows) and do high bonus damage against all archers (and some against pikemen).
Add to that micro-management of units. Do pikemen counter cavalry archers?
If the player with the cav archers is not controlling them at all, he’ll be wiped out in seconds.
If he is paying attention and just uses hit and run tactics, all pikemen will die without
landing a single hit. Having 1000 pikemen against one cav archer won’t change that. It just
takes longer. That’s the entire point of having cav archers, whether in the game or in real life.
Add in all there considerations, and an AOE battle involves many moment to moment
tactical considerations, especially with regards to battle formations and positioning generally.
The goal is to manoeuvre the battle in such a way as to have the right type of soldier dealing
with the right type of enemy, even if you sometimes have to sacrifice some of your army to
move counter-units out of position.
The AI does not do any of that; it will send a skirmisher alone against a castle, to die instantly
without doing any damage; and the next one 15 seconds later; and the next ones indefinitely.
It will not use battle formations, though that is an AOE feature.
You will do better.
380
69
Requirements
(1) The game takes place on a map, which is a grid of size N × M tiles. The absolute
minimum size you must be able to handle is 120 × 120, which corresponds to a “tiny”
map in AoE2.
Note: this is purely to have a coordinates system and an idea of the scale of the map.
The “game” is still an RTS like AoE, with units of various sizes that move continuously
and in real time, not limited in movement to specific squares; there is no notion of turn,
either.
(2) Battle scenarios.
Your battle engine will take as input a battle scenario, which is to say a map with
military units and defensive structures placed on it for each of the two players.
I have little interest in asymmetric battles. I want to see the clash of different tactics,
not of different armies.
In fact I strongly advise you to define your scenarios by populating half the map, and
mirroring that for the other player.
I have no interest in scaling up to N players in this project.
You should be able to handle armies in the 100–200 units range; plus a few buildings if
you implement those.
Scenarios should play out very fast (2min max at human-compatible speed); don’t
position the armies very far from each other; but still far enough that the general has
time to get his army in whichever formation he wants before the engagement begins.
(3) Programmable Scenarios and Lanchester’s Laws.
You should make your battle scenarios by programming them. Do not make a visual
map editor. A map/scenario is defined by a script that places units on the grid. It
should take parameters, for instance, the number of soldiers.
You will make (at the very least!) a Lanchester(type, N) scenario for the purpose of
testing Lanchester’s Laws (bu).
type is the type of units to create (melee or archer type)
N is the base number of units: you will pit N soldiers against 2*N of the same soldiers,
within range of each other.
By varying N, you’ll see (and graph, more in the CLI section) how the losses correlate
(bu)https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lanchester’s_laws
https://cgsc.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/api/collection/p4013coll3/id/1786/download
381
with N for both types of units. If Lanchester’s laws apply, you should get very different
curves depending on unit type.
(4) Generals.
Your program will also take as input a type of AI (a “general”), who commands its
army.
You will have at least two generals.
Victory = destroy target building (wonder) first OR kill all enemy units.
a. Captain BRAINDEAD.
The good captain has just come back from a successful lobotomy. He is in no state
to give any order.
Units on the field will still attack take individual action, attacking units within
their line of sight and fighting back against an attack, but they will not seek out a
fight if left alone.
Basically, zero tactical AI.
b. Major DAFT.
His name stands for. . . itself. . . , and Dumb-As-Fuck-Tactician.
Major DAFT will command all of his army to attack the nearest enemy with
absolutely no further consideration.
The difference with Cpt. BRAINDEAD is that units will actively seek out targets
and get back into the fight.
Needless to say, those exist just to make anyone else look good.
Impressively, the AOE AI manages to consistently lose to both of them in my little test
scenario. I will demonstrate this to you during the project’s introductory lecture.
You will do better. I hope. You will program other generals, ideally capable of using
unit formations, exploiting counters, using hit-and-run, interceptions, feints, and
sacrifices. I’m less interested in dodging micro (arrows, onagers shots), but it’s also an
option.
Concretely, your final version should probably have one central AI program, and each
of your generals should be defined by a few parameters, activating some features
(e.g. micro) or changing the weight of different incentives. The alternative risks huge
code duplication.
That said, during development you should also be able to pit successive versions of
your general against each other, so make sure to structure in such a way that this can
be done.
382
No general will play “keepaway” indefinitely. Even if he sees no path to victory, he
will send his last men on a suicide attack.
(5) Automated battle tournament.
You should have a way to automatically pit your generals against each other and score
their relative strengths.
You select the participating generals (by default all available functional ones) and the
scenarios (by default a selection of pertinent scenarios), and launch the tournament.
Once the tournament is launched, it is fully automatic. For each scenario, and each
pair of generals, it runs the scenario a set number of time (alternating competitors’
positions / player number by default) and records victories (draws if takes too long,
which should be see as a problem and fixed!).
The tournament will generate a document (HTML, PDF,...) listing outcome and stats,
with score matrices:
a. General score for each general across all opponents and scenarios (in percent of
victories)
b. General vs General, across all scenarios.
c. One version of above for each scenario
d. General vs Scenario, across all opponents (would be interesting if a general had
inconsistent performance across scenarios)
Do not exclude reflexive matchups (X vs X): if you don’t get roughly 50% everywhere
(with enough matches), when not alternating positions, it means you have a bug that
favours one “player” over the other.
See also the section on CLI syntax.
(6) Mechanics, Units, and Structures.
This is not a game design course, so we will just reuse the mechanics and exact stats
from AOE. The AOE wikis and other websites will be your sources.
For instance, you will in https://ageofempires.fandom.com/wiki/Attack
the general damage formula, with kelev ∈{ .75, 1.25 } as appropriate (see the next point
on elevation)
Damage = max(1, kelev ×
X
i
max(0, Attacki −Armori))
The is also nice: https://www.aoe2database.com/damage_formula/en, https://www.
aoe2database.com/unit/25/-1/en.
For units, I also like https://aoe2techtree.net/#Magyars as a synthetic source.
383
For instance I can quickly extract the relevant info for Pikemen:
Pikeman
Stats
HP: 55, Attack: 4, Armor: 0, Pierce armor: 0, Range: 0,
Line of Sight: 4, Speed: 1, Build Time: 22s, Reload Time: 3s
Advanced Stats
Attacks
1 (Shock Infantry), 1 (Standard Buildings), 25 (Elephants),
4 (Base Melee), 22 (Mounted Units), 16 (Ships), 18 (Camels),
7 (Mamelukes), 16 (Fishing Ships), 0 (All Archers)
Armours
0 (Spear Units), 0 (Infantry), 0 (Base Melee),
0 (Base Pierce), 0 (Obsolete)
You will use the exact value from the game — HP, Armors and armor classes, bonus
damage, reload times, damage values, line of sight, etc — for each unit and building
you implement.
We will ignore all civilisation bonuses and pretend we’re in Dark Age, meaning no
upgrades whatsoever. The units themselves will be mostly from Castle Age, with
some from the Imperial Age. That means you can take their raw stats as listed in the
sources, no +1 or +2 or anything.
The way archery is handled in AOE2 is complicated: Ballistics, Precision, Missed Shot
Damage, and Hitboxes are some of the concepts involved. I’m not asking you to
reproduce all that. Just pick a system that works and uses the same damage and fire
rate calculations as AOE2. We copy AOE2 behaviour where and to the extent that it’s
easy, and don’t sweat the details where it isn’t, so long as it’s similar enough that I
understand at a glance the balance of the forces in play.
The first three units below are absolutely mandatory. Implement the rest as you can,
preferably roughly in that order.
a. Knight
b. Pikeman
c. Crossbowman
d. Long Swordsman
e. Elite Skirmisher
f. Cavalry Archer
g. Onager
384
h. Light Cavalry
i. Scorpion
j. Capped Ram
k. Castle (defence and target to destroy)
l. Trebuchet
m. Elite War Elephant (trample damage)
n. Monk (healing and conversion: counter to elephants :-)
o. Wonder (target to destroy: victory condition)
You will use clearly recognisable sprites (crib those from AOE) so that I know at a
glance exactly what the units on screen are.
(7) Agile implementation.
Do not try and implement all units and buildings in one go.
Begins with just Knights and BRAINDEAD and DAFT. Then add Pikemen and
Crossbowmen.
Then make a general that uses counters to beat the pants off of DAFT, every time.
Then spend time improving him. You can (and must) automate tournaments across
different generals / versions / scenarios to quickly test whether your ideas are paying
off in practice.
Don’t optimise first. Develop your tactics using formations with smaller armies first,
then optimise and scale up.
Don’t add new units if you don’t do anything with them in the end. If you “have” Elite
Skirmishers but your AI uses them exactly as it does Crossbowmen, then it’s pointless.
Do not claim to have fully implemented them, then. You’ll show a yellow partial
implementation checkmark for that unit in the checklist during the project defence.
A unit is fully implemented when it has all the right values/armor classes etc AND a
specific behaviour in the hands of at least one of your generals, which plays to that
unit’s strengths.
You’ll preferably has a small scenario ready to show for each unit that illustrates that
behaviour in 30s flat, outmanoeuvring DAFT through superior tactics / positioning.
FISA: You have much less time for this project than your FISE comrades. Trying to
pointlessly multiply units would be an even greater trap for you. Focus on a few, and
make them work as intelligently as you can. Using one’s time efficiently is always
important, but the less time you have, the more critical it becomes.
385
(8) No main menu: CLI
Do not spend much time implementing a sophisticated game menu with a pretty
background and music etc. I could hardly care less.
I care about functionality. Let’s use a CLI. You will use argparse.
You should have something like that
battle run <scenario> <AI1> <AI2> [-t] [-d DATAFILE]
battle load <savefile>
battle tourney [-G AI1 AI2...] [-S SCENARIO1 SCENARIO2] [-N=10] [-na=False]
battle plot <AI> <plotter> <scenario(arg1,...)> <range for arg1> ..... [-N=10]
To launch a battle / load a save / run an automatic tournament / plot the outcomes of a
scenario with parameters.
-t for launching terminal view instead of 2.5D.
-d for specifying whether / where to write data from that battle.
-N number of rounds for each matchup.
-na for not alternating player position across N matches.
Tell me if you think of important options, I may want to put them here so every group
uses the same syntax.
More explanation for plot, by example:
battle plot DAFT PlotLanchester Lanchester [Knight,Crossbow] range(1,100)
Recalling the signature of the scenario: Lanchester(type, N), this does roughly
(pseudo code):
for type in [Knight,Crossbow]:
for N in range(1,100):
data[type,N] = Lanchester(type, N).run() # also, repeat N times etc...
PlotLanchester(data)
where data[type,N] contains at least the number of casualties / units remaining / total
HP damage taken on each side, and PlotLanchester produces pertinent graphs to
visualise that data. In that specific case, I expect the larger side to win every time, and
what’s interesting is to have a graph with two curves corresponding to types, with
x=N and y=casualties sustained by winning side.
Of course, a scenario may have several pertinent Plotters, and you may want to
produce the data once and iterate on the plotters, so it’s probably best to separate the
code for the scenarios and the plotters.
386
For the CLI arguments, do not hesitate to use eval() it will simplify things, allowing
you to use Python code with you own class names etc directly in the arguments, rather
than waste time writing a front-facing translation layers between them. (What are the
security implications of using eval() in that case?).
For tourney and plot, note that it should be possible, even easy, to have these battles
in parallel, on powerful CPUs at least. Two reasons:
(1) If you have properly separated the logical engine from the graphical interface, you
can run battles without displaying them graphically, and, without no need to slow
down for the benefit of humans, as fast as the CPU can compute the moves (headless
mode). (2) You don’t need a very sophisticated architecture to run battles in parallel.
Especially in headless mode. tourney can just call plenty of instances of run as batches
of external processes and wait for them to finish to collate the data / call a new batch.
Thus a very good implementation will allow you to gather data from hundreds or
thousands of battles in few minutes.
Of course, if you can’t do that, a naive implementation of tourney and plot, running
at human speed is better than no implementation at all :-)
(9) Map visualisation: terminal
Just like the game of chess is independent of the gameboard you use — wooden or
glass pieces? on the table or on a computer or purely via chess notation through email
or snail mail or . . . — the logic of your game must be independent of its graphical
visualisation.
This is extremely important to understand, with far-ranging consequences on develop-
ment time, quality and reliability of code, etc.
To force you to separate the logic of the game (the rules, its state in the abstract) from
how it is visualised, I ask you to provide two visualisations.
The first one is a terminal view. It does not need to show everything, but should still be
sufficient to get a general idea of what’s going on for small games on very small maps.
It will serve as a failsafe should you fail to develop the 2.5D view, so you have
something to show on the day of the evaluation.
You will use the letters given for each building / tile to represent the map. For instance
CCCCCCCC
CCCCCCCCC
PPPPP
PPP
P
kkkk
387
k
represents a formation of Pikemen (P) converging towards enemy knights (k). I use
uppercase/lowercase to distinguish players here, but you should use colours.
One must be able to pause the game with P, to scroll the map using ZQSD and
directional keys (+Maj to go fast).
Pressing TAB will pause the game and open a webpage (generated HTML file) listing
all units in the game and their stats (HP, position, etc) and current tasks, as well as any
relevant data on the states of player AIs. (This is purely a snapshot of the current state;
it need not be regenerated as the game progresses!)
For instance, one could learn that the soldiers have lost HP.
You will not spend too much time making the page look pretty, but do give some
thought to making it readable and searchable (collapsible sections) etc.
(10) Map visualisation: 2.5D
Separately from the terminal visualisation, you shall provide a graphical, top-down
2.5D (isometric, sprites-based) visualisation of the game map, in the style of AoE.
That means you can start or load a game either in terminal of GUI mode, or even
switch between them on the fly, using the F9 button.
You may the use the sprites of AoE or other games, if you can extract or download
them. It’s a programming project, not an art class.
You will need a graphical framework for this task. Various possibilities include:
⋄PyGame, https://www.pygame.org is the most common choice among students
for this type of projets.
⋄the Arcade Library
https://api.arcade.academy
https://learn.arcade.academy.
Very fresh, but active; a few groups used it and had a good experience.
⋄TkInter,
⋄PySimpleGUI (with TkInter backend only; simpler to begin with)
⋄PyQt5 or PyQt6 (more powerful, more complex, external requirements (bv))
⋄wxPython,
https://www.wxpython.org
Bindings to wxWidgets, similar to PyQt.
(bv)https://pypi.org/project/PyQt5/; cf. http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/examples-graphicsview.html pour
de la documentation C++. C’est à adapter à la version Python, car PyQt5 est juste une bibliothèque de liens
(bindings) vers Qt5.
388
⋄PursuedPyBear,
https://ppb.dev
This one seems very fresh out of the oven, and not documented.
⋄Kivy,
https://kivy.org
⋄or anything that works with Python, really, I’m not picky, what matters is the
result.
Test the different possibilities, and choose wisely.
Do not attempt to do this in full 3D.
You should also be able to pause in this view. Variable speed would be great as well.
(11) Minimap (2.5D):
The 2.5D view should include a minimap for fast navigation — this will be of great use
during the demonstration.
This can take the form of an actual minimap always present in the corner as in AoE, or
be a global, zoomed-out view activated through the M key. You can also have both, if
time allows.
(12) Army visualisation:
One should be able to see the numbers and types of units for both players at all times.
If all this obscures too much of the screen, use F1 through F4 to activate / deactivate
some or all of the displayed information.
(13) Save and load.
You should be able to save the game state whenever you want, and load it with minimal
loss of information.
Ideally, that includes what the AI’s state of mind (planning an attack, game plan, etc).
You must be able to handle an arbitrary number of saves, manipulating them as
standard files.
F11 = quick save
F12 = quick load
Since your scenarios should only last a couple of minutes at most, it’s less important
than for past years’ projects, but still nice to have, and it’s another thing that forces
you to have a decent architecture behind the scene, in which case it can be done in a
few lines via serialisation.
(14) Elevation. (“I have the high ground, Anakin!”)
In AOE, a map tile exists on a level of elevation (0-16). A unit on “the high ground”
relative to another, that is to say on a tile with a higher level, inflicts 1.25 times the
389
damage, and takes .75 times the damage. This applies to all units, buildings, and
damage types, not only archers.
This adds a very interesting tactical consideration, and I’d like you to implement that.
It is not a great priority, however.
It can be tough to represent graphically, but topological lines and a colour gradient
will amply suffice; plus perhaps moving up slowing units down a bit.
(15) Obstructions. VERY OPTIONAL
We’ll begin with entirely open maps with no obstructions besides units and (maybe) a
few building.
If you’ve pretty much covered all the rest, you can add obstructions to your map: impassable
tiles.
The completely changes how how the forces interact, more complicated pathfinding
algorithms become necessary. . . you get the idea.
Part VII
Python Projet: Practical Modalities
70
Groups: size and composition
This project is done in groups of 5 or 6.
Groups will be determined “randomly”, not chosen by students. The aim is both to save
time and avoid reproducing the usual cliques.
It is recommended that each group designate a “project secretary”, whose tasks include
keeping track of who does what; he should have a global vision of the state of the project,
and be able to inform me of it efficiently. He will probably be the main writer of the final
report, so pick somebody who likes to write (French or English, I don’t care).
None of this should take much time, so only a slight reduction in overall programming or
design tasks is acceptable for the group secretary.
Nor is he automatically the taskmaster, bossing others around. If that’s what you want, why
not, but how you organise yourselves in the group is entirely up to you.
390
71
Evaluation
At the very end of the semester, each group will:
⋄Hand over a short report, a couple of days before the defence, summarising which
requirements have been met, the individual contributions of each member, and the
individual score of each member, agreed upon by group consensus.
⋄Present their work (15 minutes). This is referred to as “the defence” / “la soutenance”.
It is mostly a live demonstration of the work, with the help of a few very specific slides.
⋄Hand over the git history of the whole project (all source code and assets). Immediately
before the defence.
⋄Hand over the slides used for the defence. Immediately after.
An individual mark shall be given to each student on the basis of all that.
Neither the report not the defence are marked in and of themselves. They are tools to
communicate and assess the scope and quality of your work, and that is what we endeavour
to evaluate.
72
Short report
The report must be a single PDF file, not exceeding 5Mb, titled “<group number> python
report.pdf”. Only one must be uploaded on Celene for the group.
It must contain the following things:
(1) A recent photograph of each member of the group, with the corresponding names,
arranged so that all fits on one A4 page, vertical / portrait.
(2) A screenshot of the 2.5D view of your project, showing as many things as possible.
Again, must fit on a single A4 portrait page.
(3) A synthetic list of requirements:
The project has a number of requirements, numbered in the document, each with a
title in bold.
For each requirement, in order and using the same numbering scheme as me, and using
the same titles in bold as me, you will state whether it is fully met (green), partially
met (yellow), or not met (red), with a few lines of text explaining, where applicable,
how your implementation deviates from the requirements.
391
(4) A detailed description of the contributions of each. It must be clear enough, in
conjunction with the presentation, to enable the jury to mark the work of each student.
Each member must write a paragraph listing their useful contributions to the project.
The whole group must read every such paragraph, and a consensus must be reached
that they are accurate. If a consensus cannot be reached — which will reflect poorly
upon the whole group — a dissenting opinion must be written in a paragraph below
the offending paragraph.
For instance, suppose that X claims to have done all the GUI, and Y and Z think they
have meaningful contributions to it, and the rest of the group has not followed what
happened in that part of the code.
Y and Z protest X’s claims in his contributions paragraph when the group reads it. X
refuses to modify his paragraph. Then Y and Z should add a dissenting opinion under
X’s paragraph, explaining what they disagree about. X cannot modify their dissenting
opinion, anymore than Y and Z can modify X’s contributions paragraph.
The final report must of course bear the imprimatur of all group members, but this is
especially vital for those paragraphs.
(5) A zero-sum scoring of the contributions of each group member.
Il vous est demandé de pondérer la quantité de travail (utile, justifiable) de chacun par
consensus du groupe. Par exemple: tout le monde a fourni le même travail, sauf X qui
a travaillé 2 fois plus (fourni deux fois plus d’“utilité”, pas seulement “remué deux
fois plus vent”) que les autres. Ces pondérations affecteront la note individuelle.
Qu’entend-on par travail utile, justifiable ?
Le plus facile à évaluer est la quantité de fonctionalités conçues et implémentées,
pondérées par leur importance pour le projet.
Des aspects plus indirects ou flous de l’ordre du managérial ou “aide à la cohésion
du groupe” sont à prendre en compte avec modération et beaucoup de prudence. Ne
donnez pas un poids élevé à “ce gars a maintenu notre moral en faisant des blagues
hénaurmes toutes les 5min” ou même au plus sérieux “il a joué le Boss et fait les
diagrammes de Gantt de tout le monde” – sauf si c’était vraiment très utile, finement
détaillé techniquement, et a vraiment eu une influence forte sur le groupe. Mais même
dans ce cas, c’est un travail d’ingénieur qu’on note, pas de manager. S’il a fait les deux
c’est un bonus, mais s’il n’a fait que le manager le score doit être faible, car ce n’est pas
ce qui est demandé.
On note les “résultats”, pas juste le temps passé. Quelqu’un qui bosse jour et nuit mais
fait surtout des bêtises ou dessine 50 versions des icônes dont personne n’a besoin
pendant qu’il reste des bugs urgents doit avoir un bas score. Quelqu’un qui fait ça
alors que le groupe insiste pour qu’il fasse autre chose, mais est ignoré, doit avoir un
392
très bas score.
Notons que “résultat” n’implique pas que, si ça n’apparaît pas dans le produit fini, ça
ne compte pas. Le débuggage d’un bug complexe est un travail à valoriser dans le
score, même si au final la partie du code qui a été debuggée a fini par être retirée du
projet pour d’autres raisons.
La question est “au moment où le travail a été entrepris, était-il pertinent étant donné
les connaissances du groupe à ce stade”.
Par exemple, un travail de recherche en profondeur est tout à fait valorisable, même si
le résultat final n’est pas à la hauteur des espérances – mais évidemment c’est toujours
beaucoup mieux s’il l’est !
De même, aider un camarade est aussi valorisable – là aussi dans la mesure du
raisonnable.
Le rapport doit obligatoirement fournir la pondération de la manière suivante,
obtenue par consensus (bw) au sein du groupe:
Chaque membre du groupe i est assigné un score / une pondération pi ∈N, de manière
à ce que le ratio pi/pj reflète bien la proportion de travail utile fourni par i par rapport
à j. Vous devez donc CONCRETEMENT rendre une liste d’association “membre du
groupe 7→score (nombre entier)”.
(Note: use your full name, of the form “FAMILY Given-name” for this, not just your
first name. My lists are sorted by family name, and I don’t know by heart who “Bob”
is. Bonus points (morally, at least) if you sort by family name.)
Par exemple, si l’on a pBasil = 2, pCunégonde = 1, et pQuetzalcoatl = 8 cela signifie que Basil a en
gros été deux fois plus productif que Cunégonde, mais bon globalement Quetzalcoatl
est un dieu et a bien porté le groupe, ayant fourni
pQuetzalcoatl
pBasil + pCunégonde + pQuetzalcoatl
=
8
11
= 73%
du travail total – en supposant un groupe de trois.
Pour discuter des scores de chacun, il peut être utile d’utiliser des nombres de points
“intuitifs”.
Par exemple, si P
i pi = 100, i.e. on a 100 points au total à distribuer entre tous
les membres, alors pi représente la proportion du projet (produit fini ou travail de
recherche valide) attribuable au travail de i, exprimée en pourcents.
On peut aussi partir de pi = 100 pour chacun (tout le monde est égal est moyen) et
ajuster en rajoutant des points aux membres moteur (par exemple, Machin est à 120%
(bw)pas majorité; ce n’est pas un vote. On en discute ensemble jusqu’à ce que tout le monde tombe d’accord.
Voir plus bas si l’on n’y arrive pas.
393
par rapport au membre moyen, donc pMachin = 120) et en enlevant aux membres qui ont
été plus tirés par le groupe pTruc = 80, en essayant de maintenir l’invariant P
i pi = 600
(pour un groupe de 6), afin de préserver l’idée que 100 représente le score du membre
moyen du groupe. (Même si ça fait chaud au cœur de dire “tout le monde est au dessus
de la moyenne du groupe”, mathématiquement ça ne marche pas. L’utilisation d’un
score “zero sum” évite ce biais.)
Having P
i pi be a nice, round number is not strictly necessary, but it helps me check
that I have copied the numbers correctly on my spreadsheet. In any case, tell me what
P
i pi is supposed to be, so that it can serve as a checksum of sorts.
Note: ce score ne doit pas être ajusté par le groupe pour prendre en compte des excuses, valides
ou non. Si A et B ont objectivement moitié moins avancé que la moyenne (notée à
100) alors tous deux doivent avoir un score de 50. Le fait que A a passé la moitié du
semestre à jouer à Minecraft alors que B a passé la moitié du semestre à l’hôpital suite
à une attaque de Vélociraptor (non-provoquée) ne doit pas intervenir. Les excuses
valides d’ordre médical ou autres sont prises en compte par le corps enseignant à divers
niveaux; en ce qui concerne l’auto-évaluation, ce n’est en aucun cas votre problème.
Note: this score must must be computed with respect to the whole group, not wrt. subgroups.
For instance, one group was broken into 3 pairs with different tasks, and each pair was
given an equal number of points to distribute between them. This is not valid, as it
bypasses the hard work of evaluating the value and difficulty of each task.
Note: Consensus , Vote:
A way some groups have “achieved consensus” in previous years is by averaging or
summing scores given (sometimes anonymously !) by all members to each member.
This has a chance of being a meaningful metric only if everybody is very well-informed
about every other member’s contributions. Otherwise it tends to produce noise, which
tends to yield poorly differentiated scores. You may use such techniques if you wish,
but it must be a mere starting point that is then discussed by the group until nobody is
shocked by any mark.
I consider vote-based methods a bit of a “cheat code” when it comes to achieving
consensus. Votes are a conflict-breaking tool, not a truth-finding tool. The only
consensus truly achieved by taking a vote about X is the meta statement “the outcome
of the vote about X, whatever it is, holds value.” This actually says nothing about X or
whether that outcome is correct.
That’s fine if the question is “what colour should the bike shed be”, because to the
extent that there might be a right answer here, it’s probably “whichever colour most
people want” anyway. Even if many (or even all (bx)) people dislike the result, the most
important thing is not to waste more time on the issue, and to avoid fighting over it.
Let’s just pick a colour and move on.
(bx)If you average the result of a vote on colour, you’ll probably get a vomit-inducing khaki nobody wanted :-)
394
The situation is quite different when matters of fact must be decided, with real stakes
and decidedly right (correct, accurate,. . . ) or wrong answers. The scientific method
does not proceed through votes.
Votes should only be used when there is a conflict to break, not before, and this only
if there is a pressing need to coalesce to a decision. Whenever possible, a consensus
obtained through rational discussion of all available evidence must be preferred.
Do not use voting as a clever tool to circumvent rational, possibly heated, discussion,
and avoid having to actually formulate, defend, and change your opinions.
I want a consensus on the quality of the work of each, obtained through thorough discussion —
and I know it can be hard — not a consensus on a hack to avoid really having said discussion.
The last thing I want is for a group (I take an extreme theoretical case) where everybody
wants all the points to average anonymous votes and come up with the same score for
everybody. . .
Si la pondération donnée par le groupe est manifestement fausse, c’est tout le groupe
qui sera pénalisé.
Par exemple si le groupe dit “ben tout le monde a travaillé pareil, 100 à chacun”, alors
que pendant la soutenance on voit bien qu’il y a une personne qui sait répondre à
toutes les questions, que ce soit sur la vue d’ensemble ou sur le fonctionnement du
code, et une autre qui découvre la sujet et le logiciel le jour de la soutenance, ça va
mal se passer. Soit tout le monde était tellement à la masse pendant le projet que
personne n’a remarqué les grosses différences entre membres, soit le groupe est trop
disfonctionnel pour avoir une conversation bilan honnête entre ses membres.
Les étudiants se plaignent souvent – et à raison ! – que les notes des travaux de groupe
sont injustes; c’est l’occasion de rectifier le tir et, les enseignants n’ayant pas le budget
pour une boule de cristal ou de chevaux de Troie dans vos ordinateurs, vous êtes
encore les mieux placés pour le faire.
Si un consensus ne peut pas être atteint au sein du groupe (essayez, quand-même,
parce que ça n’amusera personne de gérer ça et risque de pénaliser le groupe globale-
ment) proposez plusieurs pondérations (e.g. celle soutenue par A, B, D, et E, selon
laquelle C et F sont des glandeurs, et celle soutenue par C et F, selon laquelle ils ont
tout fait) et nous en discuterons calmement.
Si le groupe atteint tant bien que mal un consensus mais qu’un (ou plusieurs) membre
(ou sous-groupe) n’est pas satisfait, mais pas tout à fait au point de refuser entièrement
le consensus (i.e. “J’accepte, mais pas content !”, versus “Je refuse ! Révolution !”), ce
membre peut joindre au rapport, sous le consensus, une opinion dissidente expliquant
ce qui le chiffonne un peu dans le consensus tel qu’il est.
Le rapport peut également mentionner si le consensus a été obtenu facilement ou s’il a
été difficile à négocier.
395
FAQ : comment la pondération donnée par le groupe affectera-t-elle la note indi-
viduelle, exactement ? Y a-t-il une formule ?
Nous noterons au mieux, dans un monde imparfait, avec les informations dont nous
disposons.
There is indeed a formula that is being (somewhat) systematically applied. Following
Goodhart’s law (by), I will not share it.
I would just note that in 2018–2019, the maximal difference between the worst and best
marks within a group was 9 points out of 20. (The minimal intra-group difference was
0.1 points. The average intra-group difference was 4 points.)
The upshot is that you should not expect to get a good mark merely because other
people are working and the end product is good. You have to contribute to it.
Conversely, if you are unlucky and end up in a disfunctional group, this does not
automatically mean your mark will be terrible, so long as you can show meaningful
contributions.
Overall, this system, while imperfect, proved much better, meaning much fairer, than
handing out the same mark to everybody in each group, as was the case previously.
The cost is to force the group to confront and to evaluate the very real differences of
skill and investment within the group, and confront one’s autoevaluation to that of the
group, which are very socially difficult exercises, without a doubt, but necessary ones.
73
The defence
Il y aura une journée de soutenances à la fin du semestre, où chaque groupe présentera très
rapidement ses travaux, en fera une démonstration, et répondra à des questions.
Les modalités exactes sont comme suit:
73.0.1
Horaires de passage
Le planning sera en ligne sur Celene.
Deux salles seront réservées pendant les soutenances: c’est le jury qui passe d’une salle à
l’autre.
De cette manière chaque groupe peut s’installer tranquillement pendant que le groupe
précédent soutient dans l’autre salle.
(by)When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure.
396
73.0.2
Timing
Each group will have a 30min slot. You will have 15min to talk without interruption. The
remainder of the time will be for questions / remarks.
Your talk will spend
⋄2 minutes max on slides — In the next paragraph I’ll tell you exactly what your slides
are going to be. You will open with this.
⋄13 min of live demonstration.
Be extremely strict on time. I shall interrupt you mercilessly the instant you go overboard
either on the slides of the global duration.
You will be ready to switch back and forth between the slides and the demonstration during
the questions.
73.0.3
The slides
Each slide will have your group number somewhere.
There will be no animation or slide transition, or generally anything that does not perfectly
translate into a two page PDF.
You will have exactly the following slides:
(1) A synthetic table of requirements met (green/yellow/red), like in the short report, but
with fewer details so that it all fits on a single slide.
You will speak for about 1m30 maximum to summarise the important points, espe-
cially to make us understand the scope of the limitations regarding the yellow/red
requirements.
(2) A single slide with a recent photograph of each member, their name, their individual
score (as in the report — the scores must of course be the same as in the report !), and a
few keywords as to the nature of their contributions.
About 30s maximum will be spent on this; the aim is the have a rough idea how
uniformly (or not) the work was allocated before beginning.
We may use the slides as support during the questions phase.
73.0.4
The live demonstration
The demonstration must convince the jury that every requirement you claim to have met is
indeed met.
Prepare it and rehearse it well in advance, like a theatre play, using functionalities of your
project to help you, such as save and load. In your discourse, use the same keywords as in
397
the requirements list, and quickly state the corresponding requirement number, to make it
clear what requirement(s) you are demonstrating.
The demonstration must be live, we will not accept prerecorded videos or screenshot slide
shows.
During the questions phase, you must be ready to let the members of the jury interact
directly with your project.
While every member of the group must be present and answer direct questions from the
jury, not every member needs to talk equally (or indeed at all) during your 15min. Again
there is no mark for the defence itself; the aim is to convey the scope and quality of your
work. Apportion the presentation time among your group in order to maximise the clarity
of the defence.
Les démonstrations peuvent se dérouler soit sur l’ordinateur de la salle (celui connecté au
vidéo projecteur), soit sur votre ordinateur portable personnel.
Dans tous les cas, évitez les temps morts dus à des contraintes techniques. Do everything
on a single computer rather than spending time fighting the video projector each time you
switch machines.
Vérifiez aussi la connexion de l’ordinateur servant à la démo avec le vidéo-projecteur avant
le jour J.
398
Part VIII
Archived Python Project 2024–2025: AIge
of EmpAIres
Short version: Implement a bare bones “Age of Empires”-style RTS engine for AI-vs-AI battles.
74
What is an RTS / AoE?
The astute reader might notice that this projet is related to, though distinct from, Part XI[p424]:
“Archived Python Project 2021–2022: Age of Cheap Empires”. If you are not familiar with
Real Time Strategy (RTS) games, especially in the Age of Empires (AoE) series, you are
invited to get some idea of the general principles.
It should go without saying that you do not need to buy or play any of these games. You
can get all relevant information by watching videos of AoE I and II on the internet, and
consulting the wiki or the official site:
⋄https://ageofempires.fandom.com/wiki/Age_of_Empires
For a more hands-on look on that genre, you can install 0 A.D., a game originally made as a
mod for Age of Empires II, now entirely free software. You can install it on most modern
Linux distributions with a single command; for instance:
sudo apt install 0ad
# Debian-based
sudo pacman -Syu 0ad
# Arch-based
0 A.D. is its own thing, with its own unique mechanics, but remains extremely similar in
look and feel to AoE I and II, so it can give you a general idea of how a game like that plays.
For large screens, you may want to create a file ~/.config/0ad/config/local.cfg contain-
ing a line of the form gui.scale = "1.875", to scale up the GUI elements, including the
fonts — here by a factor of 1.875, to replace by what works for you.
The remainder of this document assumes basic familiarity with the concepts of those games.
75
Scope of the Project
Unlike the 2022 project, the aim is not to implement an RTS game. I want to avoid giving
too much focus to technically uninteresting aspects such as user interface and gameplay
399
mechanics. We shall have the bare minimum of buildings and units, and focus entirely
on AI-vs-AI matches, with no direct input from the user during the matches. Your main
tasks will therefore be to (1) develop a game engine, and (2) fine-tune various AI profiles
(defensive, aggressive, etc).
You will demonstrate the quality of the final product by showing large battles between
multiple AIs deploying sophisticated strategies.
75.1
List of Requirements
AoE2 is my reference point, and we shall take a minuscule subset of rules from it.
(1) The game takes place on a map, which is a grid of size N × M tiles. The absolute
minimum size you must be able to handle is 120 × 120, which corresponds to a “tiny”
map in AoE2.
(2) The maps will be randomly generated — a fact that you must be able to demonstrate.
(3) You will support at least two different types of randomly generated maps, each with
strategic and tactical implications: for instance one with generous resources dotted
across the map (take the Arabia map from AoE2 as reference for what that looks like)
and one where all the gold is at the centre of the map.
(4) Population limit = maximum number of units per player: 200.
Actual limit in play determined by houses and town centres, within that maximum.
(5) The following resources:
a. Wood (W), 100 per tile (tree)
b. Food (through farms only) (F), 300 per farm
c. Gold (G), 800 per tile
(6) Units:
a. Villager: v
Cost 50F, 25 HP, Training time 25s,
2 attack (1 attack per second for all units), speed 0.8 tile/second.
Can build buildings.
The nominal building time t of a building given below is the time required for one
Villager to construct a building alone.
If n Villagers are used, and t is the nominal building time remaining, the actual
building time will be
3t
n+2.
Can collect resources at rate of 25/minute, can carry 20.
400
b. Swordsman: s
Cost 50F+20G, Training time 20s,
40HP, 4 attack, speed .9.
c. Horseman: h
Cost 80F+20G, Training time 30s,
45HP, 4 attack, speed 1.2.
d. Archer: a
Cost 25W+45G, Training time 35s,
30HP, 4 attack, 4 range (Euclidean distance; norm 2), speed 1.
(7) Buildings:
a. Town Centre: T
Cost 350W, Build time 150 seconds,
1000 HP, 4x4, Spawns Villagers, Drop point for resources
Population: +5.
b. House: H
Cost 25W, Build time 25 seconds,
200 HP, 2x2, Population: +5.
c. Camp: C
Cost 100W, Build time 25 seconds,
200HP, 2x2, Drop point for resources
d. Farm: F
Cost 60W, Build time 10 seconds,
100HP, 2x2, Contains 300 Food.
Note: this is the only walkable building, cf. AoE2.
e. Barracks: B
Costs 175W, Build time 50 seconds,
500HP, 3x3, Spawns Swordsmen
f. Stable: S
Costs 175W, Build time 50 seconds,
500HP, 3x3, Spawns Horsemen
g. Archery Range: A
Costs 175W, Build time 50 seconds,
500HP, 3x3, Spawns Archers
h. Keep: K
Costs 35W, 125G, Build time 80 seconds,
800HP, 1x1,
Fires arrows: Attack 5, range 8
401
(8) Starting conditions:
a. Lean: 50F, 200W, 50G,
Town Centre, 3 Villagers
b. Mean: 2000(F,W,G)
Town Centre, 3 Villagers
c. Marines: 20000(F,W,G)
3 Town Centres, 15 Villagers, 2 (Barracks, Stable, Archery Range)
(9) Agile implementation.
Do not try and implement all units and buildings in one go, before starting work on
the systems that depend on them.
First implement only villagers and town centres, give them large starting resources
and implement villager wars.
Then, once the game loop is shown to work, go back and implement more variety of
resources and units.
If at the end of the day you do not have a complete product in the sense that some units
and buildings are missing, but you can otherwise demonstrate that what you have does
work as expected, that won’t be ideal, but the outcome will still be honourable. You’ll
indeed have made a game AI, albeit a limited one.
On the other hand, if you tell me that you have, technically, implemented every unit
and every building, but none of them actually moves of builds or fights, then you
don’t actually have anything of any worth.
(10) Bare-bones main “menu”.
Do not spend much time implementing a sophisticated game menu with a pretty
background and music etc. I could hardly care less.
I care about functionality. You must be able to create a new game with various
parameters, save and load a game efficiently. Whether you do this through a GUI or
entirely through command line options, it must be easy and fast to use during the
demonstration.
I would not accept, for instance, that your game can only have one (or three, or five)
save file(s) because of limitations in your menu GUI. If you must have a menu GUI,
use the standard file open dialogues for such purposes. TkInter is fine for that type of
tasks.
(11) Map visualisation: terminal
Just like the game of chess is independent of the gameboard you use — wooden or
glass pieces? on the table or on a computer or purely via chess notation through email
402
or snail mail or . . . — the logic of your game must be independent of its graphical
visualisation.
This is extremely important to understand, with far-ranging consequences on develop-
ment time, quality and reliability of code, etc.
To force you to separate the logic of the game (the rules, its state in the abstract) from
how it is visualised, I ask you to provide two visualisations.
The first one is a terminal view. It does not need to show everything, but should still be
sufficient to get a general idea of what’s going on for small games on very small maps.
You will use the letters given for each building / tile to represent the map. For instance
s
s
W
WWWWWW
WWWW
WWWW
vFTTTT
W W
WWWW
FFTTTT
TTTT
GGv CC
TTTT
GGvCC K
Hv v
H
represents a small village with a Town Centre, a gold mine to the east, guarded by a
Keep, woods to the north-east, two soldiers to the north-west, a farm to the west, with
a villager walking on it (presumably building it or farming), and two other villagers to
the south-west, next to houses (presumably building the houses).
One must be able to pause the game with P, to scroll the map using ZQSD and
directional keys (+Maj to go fast).
Pressing TAB will pause the game and open a webpage (generated HTML file) listing
all units in the game and their stats (HP, position, etc) and current tasks, as well as any
relevant data on the states of player AIs. (This is purely a snapshot of the current state;
it need not be regenerated as the game progresses!)
For instance, one could learn that the soldiers have lost HP, and the farmer is currently
building the farm.
You will not spend too much time making the page look pretty, but do give some
thought to making it readable and searchable (collapsible sections) etc.
(12) Map visualisation: 2.5D
Separately from the terminal visualisation, you shall provide a graphical, top-down
2.5D (isometric, sprites-based) visualisation of the game map, in the style of AoE.
That means you can start or load a game either in terminal of GUI mode, or even
switch between them on the fly, using the F9 button.
403
You may the use the sprites of AoE or other games, if you can extract or download
them. It’s a programming project, not an art class.
You will need a graphical framework for this task. Various possibilities include:
⋄PyGame, https://www.pygame.org is the most common choice among students
for this type of projets.
⋄the Arcade Library
https://api.arcade.academy
https://learn.arcade.academy.
Very fresh, but active; a few groups used it and had a good experience.
⋄TkInter,
⋄PySimpleGUI (with TkInter backend only; simpler to begin with)
⋄PyQt5 or PyQt6 (more powerful, more complex, external requirements (bz))
⋄wxPython,
https://www.wxpython.org
Bindings to wxWidgets, similar to PyQt.
⋄PursuedPyBear,
https://ppb.dev
This one seems very fresh out of the oven, and not documented.
⋄Kivy,
https://kivy.org
⋄or anything that works with Python, really, I’m not picky, what matters is the
result.
Test the different possibilities, and choose wisely.
Do not attempt to do this in full 3D.
(13) Minimap (2.5D):
The 2.5D view should include a minimap for fast navigation — this will be of great use
during the demonstration.
This can take the form of an actual minimap always present in the corner as in AoE, or
be a global, zoomed-out view activated through the M key. You can also have both, if
time allows.
(14) Resources visualisation:
One should be able to see the stored resources (Food, Wood, Gold) for all players at all
times. Additional information such as number of each unit types, etc could be useful
as well. If all this obscures too much of the screen, use F1 through F4 to activate /
deactivate some or all of the displayed information.
(bz)https://pypi.org/project/PyQt5/; cf. http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/examples-graphicsview.html pour
de la documentation C++. C’est à adapter à la version Python, car PyQt5 est juste une bibliothèque de liens
(bindings) vers Qt5.
404
(15) Save and load.
Those games can be long. You must be able to save the game state whenever you want,
and load it without loss of information. Note that,if you have an AI, that includes
what the AI knows about the world, and more generally its state of mind (planning an
attack, game plan, etc).
You must be able to handle an arbitrary number of saves, manipulating them as
standard files.
This will be extremely important for the defense, as you will not have time to play
several full games during the demonstration. Instead you will load saved games, taken
at interesting points of various games, to show off big battles, AI gameplan, etc.
F11 = quick save
F12 = quick load
Part IX
Archived Project 2019–2020 & 2023–2024:
Evolutionary Game of Life
76
Generalities
The aim is to create a “Game” (ca) centred around a visual and interactive simulation of
natural selection.
The serious purpose behind the game is to provide a refresher on evolutionary mechanics,
both as a matter of general culture and as a prelude to the study of AI and metaheuristics in
general.
In particular, genetic – and, more broadly, evolutionary – algorithms are a vast class of
approaches simulating aspects of Darwinian biological evolution for the purpose of solving
complex problems for which brute force or analytic approaches are unsuitable.
The results thus obtained can be very good, but are often a bit “alien-looking”, as evolu-
tionary processes, whether “real” or simulated, often defy human intuition, aesthetics, and
engineering principles. (A look at deep-sea creatures should convey that quite well.)
(ca)I couldn’t come up with a fun name for it, preferably with a pun or a gratuitous insersion of “INSA” in it,
so I’m just calling it “the Game”, for now.
405
For instance, the NASA’s ST5 antenna in Fig. 7 was obtained by evolutionary processes. It
performs quite well compared to human-designed antennae. The figure actually shows the
second version of the antenna: the first was more tree-like. A minute change in mission
parameters resulted in two completely different antenna layouts, where humans would
come up with more incremental changes.
Of course, no human intervention was really needed to adjust the design the second time:
the simulation was already set up, so entering the new constraints and pressing a button
was all that was needed (plus a few days of computing time on a supercomputer).
A challenge with evolutionary processes (from both the points of view of computer science
metaheuristics and biology) is how difficult it is to accurately predict the effects of a change
in parameters, and how easy it is to come up with plausible-sounding “just-so” stories that
don’t pan out in the end.
The Game should provide a fun experimental platform to play with populations by altering
several aspects of the creatures and their environment, and seeing how they react and evolve.
It should generate high-quality graphs showing the evolution of those characteristics over
time.
To be clear, while the process of programming the Game is in itself a way to teach evolutionary
processes to INSA students, the final product should be a good tool to help present those
notions to, say, high school students and such.
Compared to the related Clockwork (Part XIV[p451]: “Archived Project 2017–2018: Mon(s)tres”)
and Automata (Part XIII[p442]: “Archived Project 2018–2019: Automata GUI”) projects, this
one is rather less open-ended and ambitious, as you are not required to actually design, set
up, and deploy metaheuristics on a given open problem, but merely to simulate some very
specific traits in a very specific simulation.
However, I shall be a bit more demanding when it comes to feature-completeness, stability,
and usability of the final product. Furthermore, there is room for the more ambitious groups
to considerably expand the scope of the project once they have covered the basics.
I give in this document some design choices that must be respected, so as to make it easier
to compare the projects of different groups.
77
Specifications
The Game simulates a world. Since our divine powers are quite limited, our worlds shall be
quite modest: a grid of size N × M, with N = M = 100 by default (but this should be an
easily modifiable parameter; every numerical value I give should be so; the values will be
tweaked as your groups progress and experiment with them, so that they yield relatively
stable populations.).
406
The Game should represent this world graphically, at the very least with a view from the top.
I strongly recommend setting up a terminal-only graphical engine first — take full advantage
of the fact that the terminal can display colours and special characters. This should be fast
and easy to make.
For the final product, additional support for a 2.5D isometric view – in the style of “old”
games like Diablo I & II, Age of Empires I & II, etc – is also strongly recommended.
It should be reasonably cool-looking, without taking you too much time to make.
It is probably not a good idea to try and support full 3D rendering, unless some members of
your group already have strong experience in that domain. I’m not even sure what a good
library for that would be. Perhaps Panda3D?
The Game should of course have a GUI allowing the user to play with all the parameters of
the simulation.
Here are a few possible choices of framework:
⋄PyGame, https://www.pygame.org is the most common choice among students for
this type of projets.
⋄the Arcade Library
https://api.arcade.academy
https://learn.arcade.academy.
Very fresh, but active; a few groups used it and had a good experience.
⋄TkInter,
⋄PySimpleGUI (with TkInter backend only; simpler to begin with)
⋄PyQt5 or PyQt6 (more powerful, more complex, external requirements (cb))
⋄wxPython,
https://www.wxpython.org
Bindings to wxWidgets, similar to PyQt.
⋄PursuedPyBear,
https://ppb.dev
This one seems very fresh out of the oven, and not documented.
⋄Kivy,
https://kivy.org
⋄or anything that works with Python, really, I’m not picky, what matters is the result.
Note that the execution of the simulation should be independent from the rendering, as
rendering takes a lot of processing power. Thus not only should the two run in separate
threads, but it should be possible to simply activate and deactivate rendering at will while a
simulation is running. Specialised “game-oriented” frameworks should take care of this
fairly straightforwardly, without requiring you to do much system programming.
(cb)https://pypi.org/project/PyQt5/; cf. http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/examples-graphicsview.html pour
de la documentation C++. C’est à adapter à la version Python, car PyQt5 est juste une bibliothèque de liens
(bindings) vers Qt5.
407
In the world, there live creatures; they are all named Bob. There are initially P = 100 of them.
Bobs should be graphically represented by sprites that present as clearly as possible their
individual attributes (speed, size, memory, etc). The representation should be as user-
tweakable as possible to allow emphasis on whatever characteristics they are interested in at
the time. For instance, I should be able to set things up so that faster creatures are bluer, and
bigger creatures are redder, resulting in various hues of blue, red, and purple. Then I should
be able to change it completely. Bobs’ size should at least support a representation acting on
the size of the sprites.
Each Bob spawns in a random cell in the world grid at the beginning of the simulation.
The simulation proceeds by time increments, or ticks: at each tick all Bobs perform an action,
for instance walking to the next cell.
How complex their tasks and actions are depends on the number of characteristics which
will be simulated.
77.1
Basic level: food hunting
Let’s say that a day amounts to D = 100 ticks. Each day, a total quantity F = 200 of food
points spawns randomly in the World, each containing EF = 100 energy. There is nothing
preventing several instances of food from spawning in the same cell, in which case the
energy values add up.
Any food left uneaten disappears at the end of the day, just before the new food is spawned
in.
Each Bob has an energy level, starting at Espawn = 100, when they spawn, and capping out at
Emax = 200.
This energy goes down by 1 each time they move, and they move at random each tick, going
to an adjacent cell. Diagonal moves are not allowed (because they are at a greater distance;
we’ll talk about that later).
When a Bob finds food (is in the same cell as food), it instantly eats as much of it as it can,
gaining all its energy. If its energy caps out in the process, there are leftovers. It can then stay
stationary so long as there is food, but each tick spent stationary still consumes 0.5 energy.
If two Bobs access the same food at the same tick, one of them gets all, arbitrarily.
If a Bob’s energy level ever falls at or below zero, it dies.
If a Bob’s energy level caps out, it reproduces via parthenogenesis, spawning a new Bob in
the same cell (several Bobs can occupy the same cell). The new Bob spawns at Ebirth = 50
energy, while the “mother” Bob loses Emother = 150 energy (putting her at Emax −Emother = 50
energy).
408
Experiment with this and tweak the values to see what effects the different parameters have,
until the values yield a stable population with interesting rates of births and deaths.
77.2
Velocity
At the basic level, all Bobs were identical. Let’s change this, and start introducing individual
characteristics that can be acted on by natural selection.
Let’s start by adding velocity to the simulation.
The default Bobs all had a velocity of 1, moving 1 cell in 1 tick, at a cost of 1 energy.
Now, each Bob B has its own velocity, initially Bv = 1, but each Bob that spawns may mutate
a bit in that respect: say that C is born of B. Then Cv should fall uniformly in the range
[Bv −Mutv, Bv + Mutv], where Mutv = 0.1 is the mutation rate for velocity. (Bv = 1 for
initial Bobs)
Note that since velocity is not an integer quantity, handling it properly is not trivial. At each
tick, the fastest moves first, and eats all it can. If a Bob has a non integer movement velocity,
say, 1.6, then there are two ways to handle it:
⋄partial actions: (cc) on the next tick, it will move through an entire cell (eating all), and half
a cell, eating 60% of the food energy there. On the next tick, it will eat the remainder
(if nobody beat him to the punch), and move through another whole cell.
⋄speed buffer: (cd) on the next tick, it will act with a velocity of ⌊1.6⌋= 1, and store the
excess 0.6 into a “velocity buffer”. On the following tick, the buffer will be consumed
and added to the velocity before the process is repeated: thus this Bob will functionally
have velocity 1.6 + 0.6 = 2.2 for this tick, acting as though it were of velocity 2 and
storing 0.2 in the buffer for subsequent ticks.
The buffer proposal is probably the best, as it avoids having to attempt giving a meaning to
all partial actions: what is “partial reproduction”, for instance?
Speed has a cost, however. We are going to follow physics roughly, here. The kinetic energy
of an object is given by
1
2mv2 ,
so, following that, on each tick, B will consume Bc = B2
v energy to move. For instance,
double the speed means quadruple the energy cost. (It’s a bit more complicated in real
life, because that only accounts for the cost of acceleration, but this formula is sufficient to
introduce clear, intuitive trade-offs in our simulation.)
To avoid Bobs becoming immortal simply by virtue of not moving at all, we say that a Bob
consumes, at a minimum, Etmin = 1
2 energy per tick. The actual energy consumption is
(cc)This was the original proposal.
(cd)This is the revised proposal after discussions with students.
409
therefore
B′
c
= max(Etmin, Bc)
This applies for all other versions of Bc below.
Run the simulation and see how speed evolves over time.
The impact of each of characteristics such a this should be configurable in real time – for
instance if I want to remove speed from the equation I should be able to set Mutv = 0
whenever I want.
77.3
Mass
Now let’s add the possibility for Bobs to evolve some serious muscle mass. Mass will be,
like velocity, a genetic characteristic. Our default Bobs had mass Bm = 1. Like velocity, mass
is genetic, and mutates in the same way. We do not model a cost on birth, however, mass
has a cost on mobility. Following the kinetic energy model, mass multiplies the movement
cost on each tick: a Bob will therefore consume
Bc
= BmB2
v
energy on each tick for movement.
Mass should be reflected in the size of the sprites in the graphical representations. Note that
mass is proportional to volume, and volume is proportional to the cube root of mass, so the
size of the sprites should scale like
3√Bm.
What is the benefit of being bigger? You can eat (much) smaller creatures. If Big Bob B and
small bob b meet (are in the same cell at the same tick, even if one of them is only “partially”
there due to non-integer speeds), and the difference in size is important ( bm
Bm < 2
3) then, Big
Bob can, and will, eat small bob. Small bob dies. Big Bob’s energy level Be is updated
according to the equation
Be
:= Be −1
2
bm
Bm
be + 1
2be
= Be + 1
2be

1 −bm
Bm

The idea is that the fight takes some energy out of Big Bob, although less and less the bigger
is he in proportion to small Bob, and he gains up to half of small bob’s energy level. In this
model, he always gains some energy from eating another Bob.
It should be easy to change this model within the code.
If bm
Bm ⩾2
3, they ignore each other.
77.4
Perception
Now that there are predators and prey in the world, it help to be able to avoid the ones and
pursue the others.
410
Each Bob initially had a perception score Bp = 0 meaning that they are blind as bats – but
without any cool echolocation either. Bp measures of course the distance at which they
can determine whether a cell contains noting, food, or Bobs. It is the radius of the circle of
detection.
This is a genetic characteristic. Unlike speed and mass, we are going to keep that value
integral, and mutate it by 0 or ±1, equiprobably.
Since we are in a discrete world, some care will have to taken to compute those circles
properly. Given that diagonal moves are disallowed, the notion of distance that matters is
not actually that of the standard Euclidean geometry (ℓ2 norm), but the Manhattan distance
(ℓ1 norm); in dimension 2, which is what we shall work in, it is computed as
d1(A, B) = |xB −xA| + |yB −yA|
Compare to the Euclidean distance:
d2(A, B) =
p
(xB −xA)2 + (yB −yA)2.
Circles in Manhattan geometry actually look like squares do in Euclidean geometry – with a
π
4 rotation, so, pointy-end up.
At Bp = 1, all adjacent cells are detected.
Up till now, The Bobs’ decisions have been purely random. Now, whenever they detect
food, they make a beeline for it. Unlike in Euclidean geometry, there are many different
shortest paths to take. Take the algorithm: so long as you’re not there, reduce either your x
or y-distance, with same probability.
Of course, if at any time Bob detects a new food source, while on its way to another, it should
reevaluate its plan and make a beeline towards the closest one. If it detects several food
sources, it should favour the bigger ones.
By food sources, we mean both spawned food and unlucky smaller Bobs. Since how good a
food source a prey Bob is depends on its energy level, and that a prey Bob may run away, a
predator Bob will always favour stationary spawned food to other Bobs.
When several prey Bobs are detected, the smallest ones will be favoured.
When a Bob detects a larger Bob, it moves to maximise distance between the two. When it
detects several larger Bobs, it moves to maximise the distance to the closest one, and, ceteris
paribus, to the others.
When a Bob detects prey and predators simultaneously, its prey behaviour overrides its
predator behaviour: survive first, hunt second.
Perception cost is not affected by either mass or velocity. It does require eyes and a big brain,
though, which requires constant energy expenditures. (A human brain consumes about 20%
of the body’s total energy.)
411
Let’s say that for each point of perception radius, there is a flat 1
5 penalty (again, the GUI
must allow this to be modified at will) to energy each tick. The consumption becomes:
Bc
= BmB2
v + 1
5Bp
77.5
Spacial memory
A big brain has other uses. An important one is to remember the existence of stuff that’s not
visible right now.
Currently, unless they are making a beeline for some kind food, or running away, Bobs
have a 1
4 probability of going back where they just came from, which is not optimal to find
spawned sources.
Now, let’s introduce the inheritable characteristic memory space. Each Bob B has currently
Bmem = 0 memory points. Again, this will remain an integral value, and mutate by 0, ±1,
equiprobably.
A Bob has several (mutually exclusive) ways to use its memory points:
A Bob can remember the 2 × Bmem cells it visited, and hereafter avoid them, unless doing so
would lengthen a path to food or escape.
With higher priority than that, a Bob can use its memory points to remember a place where
it saw spawned food not currently in its view. This can happen if a Bob detects two food
sources at opposite ends of its perception, and goes towards the one, therefore losing sight
of the other one. Or if it sees food while running away from a predator.
It uses one memory point to remember one food location (therefore forgetting two of its
oldest visited locations). It remembers the respective energy levels of the food.
It only uses this point upon leaving sight of the food. The point is freed the instant a
remembered food comes into sight again.
While not pursuing food currently in its view (that has the priority, even if it remembers a
larger food source farther away), or running away, a Bob will make a beeline for the largest
food source it remembers seeing.
The cost is again a flat penalty per point.
Bc
= BmB2
v + 1
5Bp + 1
5Bmem
77.6
Other characteristics
Each group should invent, define, and implement a few other characteristics; put your own
spin on the subject. They should be explained in the report, and well-specified.
412
What I outline explicitly in this document should be construed as the bare minimum as
expect from each group. Once that basis is assured, be creative. Your features must be
deactivable, so that the jury can compared your projet to other groups under the same
constraints.
The is best achieved in the same style as the features listed above: set things up so that your
features are governed by constants that, for some values (0, 1,. . . ) remove the feature from
consideration.
I would be delighted to see additions tackling the evolution of altruism, or aggression
strategies (hawks vs doves), etc.
It would be advisable to plan the more ambitious “freestyle” features somewhat in advance,
and to consult me before investing significant time in them.
77.7
Sexual reproduction
So far, Bobs have reproduced solely by parthenogenesis. Now, let’s add sex to the mix
– though we will consider that Bobs are hermaphrodites, like snails, and not attempt to
distinguish Bobs and Bobettes.
On top of still having the option of parthenogenesis, when two Bobs B and C meet, and
don’t eat each other, and have high energy levels Be, Ce ⩾150, they mate, losing 100 energy
each, and creating a new Bob D at initial energy De = 100.
Note that, compared to parthenogenesis, more total energy is invested into the new Bob,
and it starts out with a higher energy level, but less is required from each parent. This is
meant to model the advantages of shared parenthood.
Of course all those values should be easily modified parameters.
D has all his genetic characteristics set to the average of its parents, and then mutation is
applied as usual.
For those characteristics, such as perception, which are integral, the cleanest way to handle
this is probably to actually store floating point values in the “genetic code” of Bobs, and
round them to the nearest integer whenever you actually use them — but not during
reproduction. That way, if B and B′ reproduce, with Bp = 1 and B′
p = 2 then their offspring
C will have, before mutation, Cp = 1.5. In practice, its perception shall be rounded to 2. But
if C then reproduces with B, the offspring D will have perception 1.25; in practice, it will be
rounded to 1. And so on.
Sexual reproduction can be toggled on and off; parthenogenesis as well.
It will be interesting to see the effects of this addition on the speed of adaptation to changing
conditions.
413
78
Save & Load
The user must be able to save to file, and load from file,
⋄the parameters of the game (N, P, etc)
⋄the state of the game, that is to say, the state of each and every Bob in the game,
including their perception, memory, strategy, etc.
Those two aspects must be handled separately; one may want to change the parameters in
bulk while the game is running. Probably the “state” save should also include parameters.
Part X
Archived Python Project 2022–2023: Avé
INSA!
The aim of the project this year is to implement a city-buildling (CB) game in the style of the
Caesar game series, which I take to include Caesar I, II, and III, Pharaoh, Zeus, and Emperor by
studio Impression Games, published by Sierra at the turn of the millennium.
Specifically, we shall aim to produce little clones of (a subset of) Caesar III with the Augustus
engine, (or maybe, for some groups, Pharaoh, Zeus, or Emperor). We shall endeavour to
keep the subset thereof which is cloned as close as possible to the original.
The features and level of polish expected will vary enormously between the FISA and FISE
versions, with the FISA version being a much shorter project of smaller scope — five weeks
in total, I believe, ending mid-December.
FISE have, approximately, until the end of January.
79
Resources and brief overview of game principles
79.1
Resources
⋄Teacher-provided resources: http://files.vhugot.com/Restricted/Caesar3
⋄Game on Steam: https://store.steampowered.com/app/517790/Caesar_3/
⋄Game on GOG: https://www.gog.com/en/game/caesar_3
414
⋄The Augustus engine: https://github.com/Keriew/augustus
⋄Fan site: https://caesar3.heavengames.com/
⋄FAQ on c3_model.txt (modding & game data extraction):
https://gamefaqs.gamespot.com/pc/63635-caesar-iii/faqs/14466
⋄Sprites Extractors:
https://github.com/bvschaik/citybuilding-tools
https://github.com/lclarkmichalek/sgreader
http://pecunia.nerdcamp.net/downloads/utilities (.exe)
Take note that the build instructions need updating.
Fill in TARGET = sgreader in .pro file and use qmake-qt4.
⋄References for housing levels:
https://impressionsgames.fandom.com/wiki/Housing_(Caesar_3)
https://web.archive.org/web/20060713205809/http://caesaralan.co.uk/strategy/
houselevels.html
⋄Blog by developers of a similar game, with interesting technical insights:
https://nepos.games/nebuchadnezzar/blog
79.2
Running the game
This game is a bit complex, and I don’t think there is a good substitute to playing its tutorial
missions and reading the game’s manual and the in-game documentation.
After obtaining the game files through whatever means suit you most, note the welcome
presence of the Manuals folder. Then install Augustus following the instructions on github.
We shall use Augustus as the reference implementation.
The sprites used by the game are minuscule on today’s high-pixel-density screens. In the
options, set “Display scale” to something suitably high. On my 1440p display, I set it to
205%; on my 1080p, 155%. Avoid round values like 200%, because that obviates the need for
smoothing, and make everything more pixelated than it needs to be.
Leave all gameplay options on the defaults settings, which are closest to the original game.
We shall focus on the buildings and mechanics from the original game, not those introduced
in Augustus. An exception to that is the Roadblock building (present in later games,
i.e. Pharaoh for roadblock, and Emperor for selective roadblock) and, as you wish, global
labour pool (idem, starting with Zeus).
79.3
Overview of game principles
The general principle is this: they are CB games inspired by historical civilisations. For the
sake of this overview, we shall focus on the Roman civilisation and the mechanics of Caesar
III, which is the main target of this project.
415
The player starts with an empty terrain, and can buy buildings to place on the map. The aim
is to build a bustling city.
The challenge revolves around the evolution of houses. When you buy houses, they are not
immediately built. First, the terrain is marked as residential, and if the city is not unattractive,
people will come from outside the map, to erect small tents and live there. “People” manifest
as walkers, that appear at a specific point at the edge of the map, and follow the road to their
destination.
Tents provide room for few people, but those people have few needs, and you can put them
to work. When you place a building that provides a service, it requires a number of workers.
The unemployed in your population, if any, will apply to work. When the building has
enough workers, it provides the service (possibly less efficiently if not fully staffed).
To provide a service, a building usually generates one or several walkers, who follow the
roads randomly for some distance, then go back to base. While they walk, they provide the
service to nearby houses / buildings.
For instance, a market will generate a merchant; when the merchant walks near a house, it
replenishes the house’s stores of whatever they need, and depletes the stores of the market.
Likewise, a doctor’s office generates a walker (doctor) that reduces the probability of plague
in serviced housing, and so on.
There are a few exceptions, where buildings directly influence an area around them, with
no walkers as intermediaries. Gardens positively affect desirability in a small radius; wells
make water available to nearby housing, etc.
The gameplay structure is as follows:
⋄set some houses, or rather tents; the people populating them can staff a few basic
services.
⋄once some of those services are available to the houses, they become more attractive,
and evolve, for instance the tent may become a mud hut, which occupies the same
space, but has room for more people.
⋄those new people can staff new services and the industries they depend upon, thereby
making parts of the city even more attractive, and causing the residences to evolve
again.
⋄the process repeats with a set sequence of needs, until the tents have been replaced by
luxurious and dense residences, assuming all goes well.
All does not always go well. Less than perfect coverage means some parts of the city could
catch fire or fall victim to plagues, or go without some basic resource and regress. If some
crucial industry is disrupted, then a need may no longer be met once stores run out. When
that happens, housing may brutally devolve into lesser states, and evict many citizens for
want of space.
416
And if that happens, then suddenly the city may no longer have enough workers to staff
some other essential industry, thereby leading to a second wave of devolution, then a third.
Homelessness favours criminality, which causes more fires and vandalism if the police
coverage is inadequate. All of this makes the city unattractive, causing more citizens to
leave and preventing new settlers from immigrating even if there is the space to do so.
A badly built city may collapse like a house of cards at the first crisis, unless judicious
emergency actions are taken (like shutting down luxury industries to ensure a steady supply
of workers for the necessities).
Building a city well means taking a lot of constraints into account when placing buildings, to
ensure that all required walkers have predictable paths and that there is a level of redundancy.
It would be a shame to see a city collapse because a fireman chose to go left three times
in a row, thereby allowing a fire to kickstart a death spiral for the city. Since the luxury
villas house far fewer people than the high-density housing they replace, even a successful
transition towards a patrician neighborhood, when badly-handled, may kickstart shortages
that may spiral out of control!
And then there is the money; you spend it to make buidings, pay your workforce, throw
festivals, import what you can’t or would rather not produce yourself, and you get it back
through taxes and trade with nearby cities. If you run out of it, it’s bad; if your taxes are too
high, the people will grumble and eventually leave.
There are, in Caesar III, dozens of building types and services.
Quoting from the manual:
To reach its highest level, housing needs access to a nearby market supplied with
four different foods, pottery, oil, furniture and two varieties of wine. Regular
visits by workers from a bathhouse, a doctor’s clinic, a barber’s shop, a priest
of each god’s temple, and representatives of a school, academy, library, theater,
amphitheater, colosseum and hippodrome are also required. If you can supply
all of these goods, and access to all of these buildings, then reaching the highest
values is simply a matter of enhancing desirability. Right- click on housing to
discover why its growth is stagnant. The panel that appears shows what the
house lacks, or the nearest negative influence on its desirability.
Furthermore, there is a sophisticated administration interface (that gets even more sophis-
ticated in later games!) to control the priorities of the various building types in terms of
staffing: who gets the available workers in case of shortage, and in what proportions?
Buildings may also be “paused” on a case by case basis. It all gets rather complex.
This is, in the end, an exercise in Python programming, not in game design. Keep things
relatively simple, at least at first. If you can make the game work with a couple of services
and house types, then you can theoretically make it work with a dozen; the technical
challenge is essentially the same. Only take the time to refine the “game” aspect once the
417
technical ones are solid.
Stick with Caesar III and its mechanics, with few exceptions like maybe convenient features
from later games such as selective roadblocks, and implement them in order: basic needs
first, and the industries required to sustain them. Use the game’s sprites for graphics. Do
not skip steps in those needs, or oversimplify them. This will simplify the comparison of
how far different groups went.
If I see patrician villas, I should know that you have implemented grapes and wine industries
and distribution, because that is a requirement in the original game.
However, you may simplify or omit things outside of the “main path” of the game, which I
consider to be housing. For instance, the mood of individual gods, or Caesar’s favour, may
be done without. The need for water or oil may not.
The precise needs for different levels of housing are given in c3_model.txt.
80
Expected features
Features marked as A or E are required of FISA or FISE, respectively. Features marked as a
or e are partly required, or optional but recommended.
The main difference between what’s expected of FISE and FISA is the complexity of the
game mechanics. The the game works with just one type of houses and one service, it’s
enough for a good project in FISA, but will be considered the bare minimum in FISE.
The text may offer more nuance on what should be implemented and suggest simple
approaches to satisfy the requirement without too much pain, or more advanced approaches
for those who want to show off their skills.
Both simple, conservative choices, implemented very competently, and more ambitious
ones, even not fully realised in the implementation — but realised enough to showcase their
potential — can result in excellent marks. Choose tactically.
Any feature not marked as required is entirely optional.
(1) AE: Done in Python 3.
In case there was any doubt, this is a Python project. . .
You may need to use some older version of Python (3.7, 3.8,. . . ) for compatibility with
some libraries or dependencies that may not be updated very frequently, like PyGame.
(2) AE: GUI framework of your choice
The game should of course have a GUI.
You may choose
418
⋄PyGame, https://www.pygame.org is the most common choice among students
for this type of projets.
⋄the Arcade Library
https://api.arcade.academy
https://learn.arcade.academy.
Very fresh, but active; a few groups used it and had a good experience.
⋄TkInter,
⋄PySimpleGUI (with TkInter backend only; simpler to begin with)
⋄PyQt5 or PyQt6 (more powerful, more complex, external requirements (ce))
⋄wxPython,
https://www.wxpython.org
Bindings to wxWidgets, similar to PyQt.
⋄PursuedPyBear,
https://ppb.dev
This one seems very fresh out of the oven, and not documented.
⋄Kivy,
https://kivy.org
⋄or anything that works with Python, really, I’m not picky, what matters is the
result.
Test the different possibilities, and choose wisely.
Based on previous experiences, and the nature of this project — especially the RTS
aspect — I think PyGame is the safest choice for this project, in that most groups in
previous years have used it and done satisfactory things.
PursuedPyBear seems too fresh.
PyGame is far from perfect, so I’m exceedingly interested in hearing from you if you
make something else work.
I haven’t seen wxWidgets used in projects, but it ought to be nearly as mature and
usable as PyQt.
(3) AE: Graphical representation of the map.
The map must be represented graphically, ideally in a near identical way to Caesar III
if possible.
The view may be 2D, top-down, using sprites (by far the simplest option — you
can even have a terminal-based one as a fallback and to develop the logic before a
more sophisticated rendering engine is available), isometric 2.5D (as in Caesar III;
similar views have been consistently achieved by most groups year after year in similar
projects, so it is really recommended), or full 3D (do not even attempt this unless you
(ce)https://pypi.org/project/PyQt5/; cf. http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/examples-graphicsview.html pour
de la documentation C++. C’est à adapter à la version Python, car PyQt5 est juste une bibliothèque de liens
(bindings) vers Qt5.
419
already have considerable experience with a suitable framework. Tests have been done
last year with Ursina and Panda3D, but neither has been found suitable for use in this
project).
If you go the 2D route, note that fan sites have a collection of 2D sprites which can
probably be downloaded and used.
For 2.5D, the original sprites of the game should be used — note that, for copyright
reasons, this severely restricts the diffusion of your project.
(4) aE: Sprite Upscale x2
If you use the original sprites of Caesar 3, you will notice that they are very small by
today’s standards, and can’t really be used at native resolution.
I recommend using an AI upscaler such as waifu2x-ncnn-vulkan, and whatever image
manipulation operations you deem necessary, to double their size.
This has the added benefit, from my point of view, of making sure you cannot simply
use the Julius and Augustus projects as rendering backends, since they won’t work on
differently-sized sprites.
(5) AE: Save and load. Pause.
Those games can be loooong. You must be able to save the game state whenever you
want, and load it without loss of information. That includes the state of every walker
and building etc.
This will be extremely important for the defense, as you will not have time to play
several full games during the demonstration. Instead you will load saved games, taken
at interesting points of the life of your cities, and from those specific points you can
add or remove buildings, shutdown or activate industries, and thus demonstrate the
impact of those actions upon your city.
The quality of your defence plays a huge role in your final mark, not because it is
evaluated as such, but because it determines what the jury understands of your project.
Consequently, you must anticipate features of the game which make showing it off
easy. Save and load is one of those. Being able to pause the game would be another.
You may think of other things in the same vein. Do not hesitate to implement them
and discuss it with me.
(6) AE: Faithful Caesar III mechanics and sprites.
I would really appreciate it if you would all use the same sprites as the original game,
as much as possible, and implement clear subsets of the mechanics of the game. This is
not to stifle your creativity, but to facilitate quick understanding of what you are doing.
If all groups use the same kind of units, buildings, and mechanics, with somewhat the
same balance, it becomes easier to understand at a glance what’s going on, and how
420
two groups differ. This is especially crucial during the defence.
You have a very short time in which to show off your work — if much of that time is
spent explaining that your drones need to mine unobtainium to build starships, rather
than mine clay in order to make pottery, in the end that is time not spent showcasing
how many features you support and how fast the game runs, which is probably not to
your advantage.
Instead, if everybody uses the same basic concepts and vocabulary, some level of
background knowledge can be assumed and we can quickly concentrate on the aspects
that truly differentiate the groups. Water and oil and clay all play the same role for
everybody, because everybody copies Caesar III, and we all know what we are looking
at.
That being said, if you absolutely yearn to make a space-themed CB game, or a
fantasy-themed game, or a horror-themed game (please, not that one), I will not
explicitly forbid you from doing so, but be aware that you will need to communicate
your mechanics extremely efficiently, and convince the jury that they are more or less
equivalent what is expected.
Either way, sprites should be as recognisable as possible. I shall try and provide them
in a convenient package.
Of course, as stated before, the point is not to re-implement everything. It is to implement
a well-chosen subset, avoid having to reinvent game balance from scratch, and facilitate
communication. Start with the basic aspects of the game, following the tutorial, and
taking values (price of buildings, number of workers required, distance walked by the
walkers,...) from gamefiles and wikis. Tweak only when you need to. Again, this is
not a game design course; the game is a pretext for coding.
Do not needlessly deviate from Caesar III mechanics and values: this is a complex
game, whose balance rests on carefully tweaked numbers. Balancing all the constraints
may simply not be possible or fun if some numbers change. Experimenting with many
sets of gameplay parameters is not a tactical investment of your energy.
Again, if that tickles your fancy to be original and go with different units, I’ll technically
allow you to do that, in the same sense as I’ll allow you to shoot yourself in the foot. At
the end of the day, it’s your foot. I just don’t recommend that course of action.
If you simply must differentiate your project from the other groups, perhaps targeting
a faithful copy of another game of the same series (Pharaoh, Zeus, Emperor) would be
the safest bet.
The main risk I see here is that it is still more explaining to do to the jury, in particular
the “candide”, who might just be getting familiar with C3, but not with the other games.
The second risk I see is that I have fewer resources to provide to help, and there is
nothing equivalent to like Julius or Augustus for those games. Those risks are still
421
manageable overall.
Regardless, if you plan on deviating from C3, please talk to me about it during the lab
classes.
(7) AE: Real-Time Aspects.
Note that such a game is inherently “real time” in the sense that there are no discernible
turns.
The many buildings and citizens and walkers of the city live their lives
simultaneously, and the city must remain reactive to any action taken by the player at
any time.
This real time aspect can be tricky to implement correctly. You will need a well
thought-out architecture and probably some form of concurrency (multithreading,
multiprocessing,. . . Sec. 31[p224]: “Parallelism and concurrency”) which you will have
to figure out on your own, since that is mostly taught during the second semester.
You can also try doing most everything in one thread, but it has its own difficulties:
if the main game loop is not fast enough, you will have terrible input lag, dropped
inputs, and more.
Libraries like PyGames usually offer examples and propose standard ways of handling
inputs, event queues etc. By starting from pertinent examples, you should be able to
get things working.
I thought this aspect ambitious last year, when I gave my first RT-based project (the
previous ones were either turn-based or radically different types of work), but to my
surprise and delight, no group had much trouble with it.
FISA:
Keep the game very simple and lean so that any architecture can be made to work. For
instance, if animating your sprites becomes a problem, then just don’t animate them.
(8) aE: Walker visualisation
Caesar III offers a variety of views of your city, each focused on one industry or service.
For instance, one view lets you see water coverage, and related walkers, while hiding
all other aspects. You must (FISA: should) implement such a view for each of the
aspects you introduce in your project. Again, this is essential (FISA: useful) for a good
defence, as it is otherwise difficult to quickly showcase one particular mechanic —
especially if you have implemented many of them.
(9) e: Variable Speed
Saved games help you show off specific game configurations, but to really get an idea
of the flow of the game, it is best to see the city evolve. But we don’t have time for that
in a defense.
422
Thus, it would be helpful if the speed of the game could be changed — specifically
increased — so that we can see the town react on fast-forward.
Of course, how fast the game can run when at full speed will depend upon both your
machine and the quality of your implementation. Thus, for the defense, you can also
prepare time lapse videos showing the relevant points.
Note that this can be complex to get right, as it divorces real time from game time. If
you want that feature, you should plan for it from the start; adding it post facto is liable
to break things badly.
(10) No procedural map generation.
Caesar III has fixed maps, designed in an editor. For that type of game, where one stays
hours on the same map, and the exact shape of the map is an important factor to the
difficulty, this is enough. There is no need to implement procedural map generation.
(11) e: Trading
Have neighbouring cities with which to trade specific goods, as in CIII.
(12) e: Administration
Implement some degree of global control over your city to adjust tax levels, industry
priorities, visualise service coverage (this is the most important part, as discussed
previously), and so on.
(13) Disasters and Invasions/War
There are some combat mechanics in CIII; you can implement them if you want.
(14) Gods and favour of Caesar
Beyond providing services, temples also serve to appease the gods, who might send
a disaster your way if they feel neglected. Likewise, Caesar may attack you if you
mishandle your treasury too much.
It would be interesting to implement those aspects, but they are not at all essential.
Focus first on more visible services and industries, and their walkers.
423
Part XI
Archived Python Project 2021–2022: Age of
Cheap Empires
The aim of the project this year is to implement a strategy game in the style of the Age of
Empires game series — specifically, the first two. The first one being simpler, it seems a better
starting point.
The features expected will vary enormously between the FISA and FISE versions, with the
FISA version being a much shorter project of smaller scope — five weeks in total, I believe,
ending mid-December.
FISE have, approximately, until the end of January.
81
Resources and brief overview of game principles
81.1
Resources
If you are familiar with those games, splendid. If not, it should go without saying that you
do not need to buy or play any of these games. You can get all relevant information by
watching videos of AoE I and II on the internet, and consulting the wiki or the official site:
⋄https://ageofempires.fandom.com/wiki/Age_of_Empires
⋄https://ageofempires.fandom.com/wiki/Buildings_(Age_of_Empires)
⋄https://ageofempires.fandom.com/wiki/Units_(Age_of_Empires)
⋄https://ageofempires.fandom.com/wiki/Technology_(Age_of_Empires)
⋄https://www.ageofempires.com/tech-tree/greek/
The wiki shall serve as a reference document on technologies, unit types and statistics, etc.
For a more hands-on look on that genre, you can install 0 A.D., a game originally made as a
mod for Age of Empires II, now entirely free software. You can install it on most modern
Linux distributions with a single command; for instance, for any Debian-based system,
sudo apt install 0ad
will do the trick. 0 A.D. is its own thing, with its own unique mechanics, but remains
extremely similar in look and feel to AoE I and II, so it can give you a general idea of how a
game like that plays.
424
For large screens, you may want to create a file ~/.config/0ad/config/local.cfg contain-
ing a line of the form gui.scale = "1.875", to scale up the GUI elements, including the
fonts — here by a factor of 1.875, to replace by what works for you.
I am hoping that enough students will have played an AoE game before — or at least some
similar RTS game — that I can affect one per group, and that they can serve as “RTS experts”
within the group. If not, too bad, but it should not be much of a problem.
81.2
Overview of game principles
The general principle is this: they are real-time strategy games (RTS) inspired by historical
civilisations and battles, where players control units on a map. Several players share a map;
the last one standing wins.
You start with villagers and a Town Center.
Villagers can acquire resources: they can forage, hunt, fish, or farm for food, fell trees for
wood, and mine for gold or stone — all of which takes time. Once they drop resources at the
town center (or other compatible drop points), the player can use them.
For instance, for 50 food, the town center can create a new villager — a process that takes
20 (cf) to 25 (cg) seconds, and during which the town center cannot create other units or research
technologies. A technology is researched at a building, and changes some aspect fo the
civilisation, generally for the better: given access to new buildings or types of units, improve
existing units, etc.
Villagers can also build new buildings (ch) — which costs wood, and even stone for things
like castles. They are poor fighters, though. If you want a fighting force, build a Barracks,
and train soldiers there. They cost food, along with wood for archers, pikemen etc, and some
gold. The more powerful units are usually more gold intensive. Cavalry units (the horse is
not treated as separate) are also quite food-intensive. There is a kind of rock-paper-scissors
relationship between the different unit types. For instance archers are generally good against
infantry, that tends to die before getting to them and be vulnerable to shoot and run tactics,
but weak against cavalry. Some units have special bonuses against others; for instance, in
AoE II, the dirt-cheap Pikemen infantry line has massive bonuses against cavalry, reflecting
the historical fact that cavalry charges fare poorly against rows of long, pointy sticks.
There is a population cap: 50 in AoE I, 200 in AoE II — and I believe it can be set up to 500
in AoE II Definitive Edition, but I never heard of anybody plays with those settings. The
(cf)AoE I
(cg)AoE II
(ch)In AoE, military units cannot build anything — with the exception of the Sicilian Serjeant, a unique unit
introduced in 2021.
In 0 A.D., from what I have seen, military units are also builders — and only they can build military buildings.
I’d prefer sticking with AoE villagers in your game.
425
difficulty of the game is to balance your economy (villagers gathering resources) and your
army.
There are limited resources on the map — how much exactly depends on the map type
and on random generation. Most maps include a gold and a stone mine not far from your
starting position. Others you find by exploring the map; or other players find them before
you. They contain a fixed quantity of the resources; when they are depleted, that’s it. Tree
don’t regrow — though there are a lot of them, — nor do the berry bushes, or the animals.
Farms can be planted, that generate a lot of food (though still a fixed quantity) for a modest
wood investment. They are the main source of income starting midgame.
In a typical game, stone and gold run out late-game. Wood doesn’t, typically, and if wood
doesn’t, neither does food. But it may on some map type: in a map comprised of very small
islands, there may not be a lot of wood available, which constrains the use of a large navy. . .
The games offer a fairly large number of civilizations. They are, however, symmetric RTS,
since the all civilisations share the same units and technologies, with only minor variations
(and one or two unique units in AoE II). This is opposed to asymmetric RTS like Starcraft,
with fewer factions, each with entirely different building, units, resources, and strategies. (ci)
In our small project, we can pretty much ignore the “multiple civilisations” aspect. One is
enough, provided it has access to enough unit archetypes — e.g. infantry, cavalry, archery,
siege, priests/monks (cj), perhaps a navy — to enable different strategies. At least two of those
would be nice.
The most important technology available to a player is “going up an age”. AoE I for instance
has the Stone Age (starting age), Tool Age, Bronze Age, and Iron Age. Moving up the ages is
expensive, but essential, as in unlocks a large number of buildings, units, and technologies,
as well as upgrading existing buildings and units.
You may include such a mechanic if you have time, but it is not absolutely essential. This is,
in the end, an exercise in Python programming, not in game design. Keep things relatively
simple, at least at first. If you can make the game work with one age and two military unit
types, you can also make it work with four ages and five types: the technical challenge is
essentially the same. Only take the time to refine the “game” aspect once the technical ones
are solid.
(ci)AoE IV is not released yet, but it seems to be designed as an asymmetric RTS, to a large extent. Which I
approve, because having the same “armored guys with two handed swords” as infantry in European, Arabic,
and Mesoamerican civilizations was a bit jarring. It was not a problem in the original release, with only
European civilisations, but twenty years and twenty-two new civilisations later, it looks a bit weird (even if the
Unique Units help in that regard).
(cj)They can convert enemy units. . .
426
82
Expected features
Features marked as A or E are required of FISA or FISE, respectively. Features marked as a
or e are partly required, or optional but recommended.
The text may offer more nuance on what should be implemented and suggest simple
approaches to satisfy the requirement without too much pain, or more advanced approaches
for those who want to show off their skills.
Both simple, conservative choices, implemented very competently, and more ambitious
ones, even not fully realised in the implementation — but realised enough to showcase their
potential — can result in excellent marks. Choose tactically.
Any feature not marked as required is entirely optional.
(1) AE: Done in Python 3.
In case there was any doubt, this is a Python project. . .
You may need to use some older version of Python (3.7, 3.8,. . . ) for compatibility with
some libraries or dependencies that may not be updated very frequently, like PyGame.
(2) AE: GUI framework of your choice
The game should of course have a GUI.
You may choose
⋄TkInter,
⋄PySimpleGUI (with TkInter backend only; simpler to begin with)
⋄PyQt5 or PyQt6 (more powerful, more complex, external requirements (ck))
⋄PyGame,
https://www.pygame.org
⋄wxPython,
https://www.wxpython.org
Bindings to wxWidgets, similar to PyQt.
⋄Kivy,
https://kivy.org
⋄the Arcade Library
https://api.arcade.academy
https://learn.arcade.academy
⋄PursuedPyBear,
https://ppb.dev
This one seems very fresh out of the oven, and not documented.
(ck)https://pypi.org/project/PyQt5/; cf. http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/examples-graphicsview.html pour
de la documentation C++. C’est à adapter à la version Python, car PyQt5 est juste une bibliothèque de liens
(bindings) vers Qt5.
427
⋄or anything that works with Python, really, I’m not picky.
Test the different possibilities, and choose wisely.
Based on previous experiences, and the nature of this project — especially the RTS
aspect — I think PyGame is the safest choice for this project, in that most groups in
previous years have used it and done satisfactory things.
PursuedPyBear seems too fresh, and I have never had any group try Kivy or the Arcade
— but then again, I have never explicitly proposed them before.
PyGame is far from perfect, so I’m exceedingly interested in hearing from you if you
make something else work.
I haven’t seen wxWidgets used in projects, but it ought to be nearly as mature and
usable as wxWidgets.
(3) AE: Graphical representation of the map.
The map must be represented graphically.
The view may be top-down, using sprites (by far the simplest option), isometric 2.5D
(à la Baldur’s Gate; an ambitious choice, though not too complex compared to 2D if
done well), or full 3D (do not even attempt this unless you already have considerable
experience with a suitable framework. Tests have been done last year with Ursina and
Panda3D, but neither has been found suitable for use in this project).
(4) AE: Save and load.
Those games can be long. You must be able to save the game state whenever you want,
and load it without loss of information. Note that,if you have an AI, that includes
what the AI knows about the world, and more generally its state of mind (planning an
attack, game plan, etc).
This will be extremely important for the defense, as you will not have time to play
several full games during the demonstration. Instead you will load saved games, taken
at interesting points of various games, to show off big battles, AI gameplan, etc.
(5) ae: AoEI-adjacent “antique” theme and units.
I would appreciate it if you would stay with roughly the same theme an units as AoE I.
This is not to stifle your creativity, but to facilitate quick understanding of what you
are doing.
If all groups use the same kind of units, buildings, and mechanics, with somewhat the
same balance, it becomes easier to understand at a glance what’s going on, and how
two groups differ. This is especially crucial during the defense.
You have a very short time in which to show off your work — if much of that time is
spent explaining that your drones need to mine unobtainium to build starships, which
428
are weak to laser attacks but strong against Psykers, . . . in the end that is time that
is not spent showcasing how smart your AI is and how fast the game runs, which is
probably not to your advantage.
Instead, if everybody uses the same basic concepts and vocabulary, some level of
background knowledge can be assumed, we can quickly concentrate on the aspects
that truly differentiate the groups.
That being said, if you absolutely yearn to make a space-themed game (cl), or a fantasy-
themed game, or a horror-themed game (please, not that one), by all means do so, but
be aware that you will need to communicate your mechanics extremely efficiently, and
convince the jury that they are more or less equivalent what is expected.
Either way, sprites should be as recognisable as possible. If you can find AoE I or II’s
own sprites somewhere, whether from the original or “Definitive” editions , that’s
perfect.
You can and should also dip into the wiki, linked above, for ideas as to units and
technologies.
Of course, the point is not to re-implement everything. It is to avoid having to reinvent
game balance from scratch. Pick a few units, lift the health, attack values, cost, creation
time etc from the wiki, and start from there. Tweak only when you need to. Again,
this is not a game design course; the game is a pretext for coding.
You can go nuts with game design when your engine is solid; spending too much time
pondering how many hit points and armor your hoplites should do is not a tactical
investment of your energy.
Again, if that tickles your fancy to be original and go with different units, I’ll allow
you to do that. I just don’t recommend it.
(6) aE: Human vs. AI match.
This is a game of war. What is war without an opponent? Since multiplayer is an
entirely different kettle of fish (cm), you will need to implement some kind of AI.
For FISE, it is expected — or at least hoped — that an AI can take control of a civilisation,
exactly as the player does — preferably without cheating, but if you must, you can
give it extra resource or a discount. . . If you do, however, you must include an option
or difficulty setting to disable that.
Regardless, it must have a recognisable game plan: gathering resources, building stuff,
researching technologies, training units, mounting assaults.
(cl)Star Wars Galactic Battleground (2001) is precisely AoE II with a Star Wars skin.
(cm)It is quite possible that you will be called upon to add multiplayer functionality to the game during the
next semester, as part of the Network Project. I haven’t talked to Mr. Toinard about this yet.
429
To understand what it means to have a game plan, you can learn from good AoE
players: there is a general consensus on what you should do at the beginning of a game
to ensure a good position — a concept similar to overtures in Chess. What should the
villagers gather in priority, what should they build and when, to optimise the early
economy. For instance, this video covers the beginning of the game for AoE II. You can
try and do something similar for your own game, and implement it as an AI strategy.
For FISA — or for FISE who are in over their heads — you should probably keep things
simpler, and have an opponent that plays by different rules. You could have savages or
raiders or demons or what have you spawn from special buildings — let us call them
Hell Gates — at an increasing rate, and from time to time they all converge upon your
buildings and kill everything in sight, then, for a change, burn everything in sight. No
resource management needed, nor any particular intelligence beyond untrammelled
aggression — and maybe the good sense not to leave to Gates undefended.
The aim of the game becomes to find and destroy the Gates before being overwhelmed
or running out of resources.
In what follows, we shall speak of “AI” only if the computer emulates a human player,
playing by the same rules (+/- mild cheats).
(7) ae: Real-Time Strategy.
FISE:
The real time aspect can be tricky to implement correctly. You will probably need
a good architecture and some form of concurrency (multithreading, multiprocess-
ing,. . . Sec. 31[p224]: “Parallelism and concurrency”) which you will have to figure out
on your own, since that is mostly taught during the second semester.
You can also try doing everything in one thread, but it has its own difficulties: if the
main game loop is not fast enough, you will have terrible input lag, dropped inputs,
and more.
That is not to say it is impossible for you to get an RTS working, only that it seems
ambitious. Libraries like PyGames usually offer examples and propose standard ways
of handling inputs, event queues etc. By starting from pertinent examples, you should
be able to get things working.
However, let us note that it is in fact the first time I propose a Python project that is not
intrinsically turn-based. That makes you pioneers, boldly going where no third-year,
first semester STI student has gone before. That, or guinea pigs. Depending how you
look at it.
If you fancy yourself neither a pioneer nor a lab rat, you may want to adapt the game
to be somewhat turn-based.
FISA:
430
Keep the game very simple and lean so that any architecture can be made to work. For
instance, if animating your sprites becomes a problem, then just don’t animate them.
Or, you can go with a barebones turn-based adaptation of the game, played with much
fewer units on a much smaller map; a bit like a chess game.
(8) Variable Speed — if RTS
Saved games help you show off specific game configurations, but to really get an idea
of how your AI works, it is best to see a game in full. But we don’t have time for that
in a defense.
Thus, it would be helpful if the speed of the game could be changed — specifically
increased — so that we can see the AI build its town, mount its assaults, and react to
your own, all at a reasonable pace.
Of course, how fast the game can run when at full speed will depend upon both your
machine and the quality of your implementation. Thus, for the defense, you can also
prepare time lapse videos showing the relevant points.
Note that this can be complex to get right, as it divorces real time from game time. If
you want that feature, you should plan for it from the start; adding it post facto is liable
to break things badly.
(9) ae: Procedural map generation.
AoE generates its maps randomly, following a set of constraints regarding starting
positions, resource allocations, terrain and elevation, etc.
You should probably do something like that. That said, it is not essential, so you should
start by creating a single map, and getting things working on it first.
Map generation is not essential, but is a nice addition and should be very simple to
implement and integrate, while adding spice to the game — especially combined with
fog of war. Thus it is recommended, if you have time.
(10) e: Fog of War
AoE uses a fog of war: the map is revealed by your units, and enemy units are only
visible while in the line of sight of one of your own.
This is nice to have, but not essential to the game.
Note that if it is implemented, then the AI must obey the same rules as the player,
and not gain any information from what happens outside its visibility. This is not
trivial to implement correctly, and even less so to assess in a defense — how does one
differentiate between AI knowledge and guesses? . . . especially while the AI is itself
hidden under our fog of war.
(11) Replay games
431
Likewise, beyond save games, that preserve the state of the world at a given time t,
you could try saving “replays”, that save the game at every time, and enables us to
replay it like a video, but in the game engine.
Of course, the implementation would not make 100 normal saves a second. The idea
instead would be to save the commands sent by each player during the course of the
game, and resend them with exact timing.
That relies on the game engine being entirely deterministic.
Not such a simple
assumption, especially combined with real time aspects. Even if perfectly implemented,
such recordings break at the slightest change in game logic — notice that nearly
every game offering such features announces with each update that old replays are
incompatible with the new version — AoE II and Tekken 7 are examples of such games.
That means that if you fix a bug in, say, the AI, just before the defense, your replays
may — and likely will — break.
For those reasons, pursuing this feature is not recommended.
(12) e: More than 2 players.
The minimum that must be implemented is Human vs AI, and since we eschew
multiplayer, there is at most one human player. AoE games support up to 8 players.
You can do the same if you wish. Human vs 7 AI can be fun.
If you do so, implementing diplomacy to create factions would be relevant.
https://ageofempires.fandom.com/wiki/Diplomacy
If you do that, you will probably need to have different map sizes.
(13) e: AI vs. AI. Let them fight!
Gaming is hard work. Sometimes, you just want to watch a good war, but leading an
army is too much work.
If you have a working AI, there should be nothing preventing you from creating a
game with only AIs, and watch them duke it out.
(14) Civilisation variety.
AoE games implement a great many civilisations, each with different technology trees,
bonuses, and unique units (in AoE II).
As discussed in the overview, I do not advise emulating that. One civilisation is quite
enough, provided it is a bit versatile.
(15) ae: Ages.
“Aging up” is the most important technology in the AoE games. Gameplans revolve
around the trade off of aging up now for a power boost, at the cost of resources and
432
time, or using the resources to mount a raid against your opponent, in the hope of
ruining their economy and delaying their own capability to age up.
Having something like that would be nice, but is not absolutely essential for the project.
If you do implement ages, just go with two of them rather than four or more. At least
that is my advice unless you already have an extremely solid engine.
(16) aE: Starting resources.
You should be able to start a game with varying quantities of resources, not just the
default. Ideal, you could even tweak this per player, making this a very cheap, but
very effective way to control game difficulty.
Letting the AI start with lots of resources can be a good way to showcase its game plan.
(17) AE: Cheats and AI commands.
AoE has many fun cheats. Cheat codes in games are not just there for the benefit of
players, however. They are useful to test the game. Here are the cheat codes that you
should implement (lifted directly from AoE I and II)
⋄NINJALUI: get 10000 of each resource.
⋄BIGDADDY: spawn very powerful unit at town center.
⋄STEROIDS: training, building, research, foraging, farming, and mining times are
instantaneous. . . for all players, not just you.
⋄REVEAL MAP: Reveal the entire map, exactly as though you had explored it,
which means that enemy units are not revealed, while trees, and stone and gold
mines are. Enemy buildings are not revealed. Issuing the command again toggles
effect.
⋄NO FOG: Remove the fog of war. Any explored part of the is therefore fully
visible as though under the line of sight of your units. Issuing the command again
toggles effect.
Additionally, you should have a few commands to influence the AI, force it to launch
an immediate attack, check its state of mind, put your civilisation on autopilot, or
simply exchange the civilisations you and the enemy AI control.
The idea is that you should have commands that enable you to debug and show off
your AI. What commands those are will depend on your AI.
433
Part XII
Archived Python Project 2020–2021:
Dungeons & Dunces
83
Overview
The aim is to create a Computer Role-Playing Game (cRPG) loosely based on an extremely
simplified version of the D&D 3.5 or Pathfinder first edition ruleset, in the style of games
such as Baldur’s Gate, Neverwinter Nights, Pathfinder: Kingmaker, etc.
The following links offer exhaustive references to the rulesets in question.
https://www.d20srd.org/index.htm
https://www.d20pfsrd.com/
The Pathfinder system is preferred where these differ, but the DnD page is linked as well
because it is a bit simpler to read and navigate in my opinion. They are very similar in any
case.
If you are completely unfamiliar with those systems, or with RPGs in general, take a few
minutes to read up on the general principles, or better yet talk with a fellow student with
experience in such games before reading on.
The focus will be on a dungeons crawling for a small (3 max), low level (level ≈1-5) party,
with classes covering at least the three archetypes: Fighter, Mage, Rogue.
84
Features, Required and Optional
Any feature not marked as optional is required.
(1) Done in Python 3.
In case there was any doubt, this is a Python project. . .
(2) GUI framework of your choice
The game should of course have a GUI.
TkInter (simpler to begin with) and PyQt5 (more powerful, more complex, external
434
requirements (cn)) are two possibilities for building it. I hear good things about PyGame
as well.
(3) Graphical representation of the map.
The maps must be represented graphically.
The view may be top-down, using sprites (by far the simplest option), isometric 2.5D
(à la Baldur’s Gate; an ambitious choice, though not too complex compared to 2D if
done well), or full 3D (do not even attempt this unless you already have considerable
experience with a suitable framework).
(4) Grid or no grid, that is the question.
The game will need to solve whether two units are in contact, how much space they
occupy, whether they are in range of some effect or ability, and how they move.
To do so, you can use a grid, which can traditionally be square or hexagonal, or simply
compute the Euclidean distance within a floating point Cartesian coordinate system.
The latter is recommended. Grids are only used in tabletop games because gamers are
not keen on computing squares and square roots by hand multiple times every round.
With the help of a computer, this is no longer a problem.
(5) Level / Campaign editor.
The user must be able to build his own dungeons / maps, possibly involving multiple
levels and connectivity between them, and them play them.
It is not required that the user can implement complex logic in the campaign, e.g. set
triggers, handle quests etc.
It is required that levels can be built, connected to one another, and populated with
enemies, NPCs, traps, and treasure, fixed or random to some extent. In that case, the
campaign is simply a dungeon crawl.
(6) Save and load
Of course, the player must be able to save his game – at least outside of combat – and
load the game later.
(7) Random level / maze generation. (Optional but strongly recommended)
One approach can be to build a fairly impressive, static campaign to show off the game
engine’s capabilities.
Another would be to generate levels randomly, Roguelike-style.
(cn)https://pypi.org/project/PyQt5/; cf. http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/examples-graphicsview.html pour
de la documentation C++. C’est à adapter à la version Python, car PyQt5 est juste une bibliothèque de liens
(bindings) vers Qt5.
435
The two approaches can be mixed as well; for instance, a campaign could well be static,
but include, at some point, a maze that is procedurally-generated, to catch returning
players off-guard.
(8) Exploration and line of sight.
Maps can be pre-explored, under fog of war, or completely unexplored when the party
first enters it. The unexplored map is revealed as the party moves, taking into account
the lines of sight of all.
Mobile units are only visible if a member of the party can see them.
Of course, you need to provide a map / minimap of the current level to the player,
respecting fog of war rules.
For bonus points, allow the player to consult the maps of previously visited levels the
party is not currently in, and to put their own notes and points of interest on the map.
(9) Last known position (Optional).
If the party loses sight of a mobile unit, there may be an option to display a “last known
position” marker for that unit on the map.
If you go for “advanced AI”, you will need at least enemy units to remember where
they last saw the party, so as to mount ambushes etc.
Note that, for all intents and purposes, the player party is treated as a single unit for
the purpose of line of sight, knowledge of the map and enemy positions, etc. That is to
say, for instance, whatever the Fighter knows or sees, the Mage is aware of as well.
(10) Talking NPCs and merchants. The game will be focused on dungeon-crawling, but it
must be possible to talk to and trade with some NPCs.
(11) Turn-based or RTWP.
It is strongly recommended to make the game Turn-Based.
Implement at least standard and move actions; preferably full-round attacks as well, if
your game supports classes or levels with more than one attack per round.
If you are feeling adventurous, you can attempt to go with Real Time With Pause
(RTWP), but it can get more messy.
(12) Area of effect imprint.
Some spells and abilities, such as Fireball, affect a wide area; the game should let you
see the "imprint" of the spell before you cast it, so you can position it exactly.
(13) Single player + AI.
The game must support a single player mode, facing off against AI-controlled enemies.
436
Those enemies must be able to detect and engage the player party, making use of their
basic attacks and abilities, even if they may lack good judgment in applying them, and
display no sense of self-preservation.
If one creature detects the player, it may be acceptable that all of them immediately
shares that knowledge.
(Sadly this describes the AI of most cRPGs. . . )
(14) Advanced AI (Optional).
It would be great if the AI could be more sophisticated.
In that case, each monster should have its own knowledge of the party and other allied
monsters, and be able to run away from the party to alert its friends – possibly bringing
an army back on its heels! This necessitates modeling at least basic communication
between enemies.
It should use discernment in avoiding dangerous Areas of Effect, whether the party’s
or his own.
This intelligence can be conditional on the creature having a high enough INT stat;
some creatures may be designated as leader of a group of its lesser kin or subordinates,
and coordinate their actions so long as it as able to communicate with them, making it
a priority target.
Different creatures may have different level of aggressiveness and courage or morale,
leading them to either fight to the death of flee as the slightest hint they are outmatched.
This of course may be influenced by the presence of a designated leader or of powerful
paragons of their race on the battlefield.
(15) Classes.
Of course the point is not to implement 50 classes or esoteric D&D mechanics.
Just pick the main features of Fighter or Barbarian, Sorcerer or Wizard (henceforth
called "Mage), and Rogue.
You will implement all attributes (STR, DEX, CON, INT, WIS, CHA), and their basic
effects on attack and damage rolls, armor class, etc. Use your common sense and do
not try to implement every feature in the rule set. Start with those features which are
most important for combat: Hit Points, armor, attack rolls, saves, etcetera.
Each class should support a few levels with one or two feats, and two or three spells
for the mage. Of course XP gain must be implemented. XP may be granted by killing
monsters or by reaching deeper levels of the dungeon.
Rogues should implement Sneak Attack.
Mages should preferably be modelled after Sorcerer rather than Wizard due to simpler
437
casting mechanics and higher usefulness in dungeon-crawls. Their spell-casting
progression can be copied from Wizard, on odd levels instead of even ones, so as to
boost their usefulness at low level. (Spellcasters are weak at low levels and shine at
higher levels; since this game will stay at low level, Mages need all the help they can
get). Cantrips shall follow the pathfinder model and be at-will.
If you introduce diseases, poisons, curses, or other mechanics, implementing Cleric as
well is a must.
Enemies may have custom classes, or they may simply use the same ones as player
characters, just with different attributes and bonuses.
(16) Multiclassing. (Optional)
You may allow multiclassing; that it to say, to take levels in more than one class, for
instance, the first level as Rogue, and the second as Fighter, the third as Rogue again,
etc.
Note that this may complicate the character sheet, so if you choose to implement this,
plan ahead rather than trying to add the feature after the fact.
(17) Races. (Very optional) You don’t need to implement multiple races. Humans will
suffice. But of course you can provide other races if you want, and there is nothing
more urgent to do.
(18) Skills.
Only a small subset of available skills need be implemented. Among them are Stealth,
Disable Device, and Perception (as in Pathfinder), essential for the Rogue class.
Everything else is very optional. If you implement poisons, you will need Heal as well.
Use Magic Device is not necessary; assume the Mage and maybe the Rogue can use
the wands they find.
Of course, the full complexity of each implemented skill need not be present; the basics
will suffice.
Skill points per levels will need to be adjusted depending on how many skills you
implement.
(19) Resting mechanics.
Of course, resting mechanics must allow characters to regain HP and spells. To simplify,
have characters regain everything in a single rest.
There must be a risk of being attacked during the rest if enemies are nearby. This can
be handled as new enemies spawning out of nowhere or as enemies making their way
from other parts of the level to attack you, the latter being more advanced.
(20) Items.
438
There should be a few items available in the level or and/or from vendors: swords, and
other weapons, armors, robes, wands, potions (in particular healing potions), rings,
amulets, etc.
Just one or two different items for each category will suffice.
(21) Customisable hotbars and keyboard shortcuts
The GUI must provide hotbars where each character may organise their abilities, spells,
etc.
The player must be able to customise the keyboard shortcuts used to access those
abilities.
(22) Combat logs.
The game must provide extensive combat logs. For instance every attack must show
what attack score was rolled against what AC, and it must be possible to find out
where the attack and AC scores come from. That is to say, if I see my Fighter is rolling
against an AC of 19, I must be able to find out how much of this AC comes from a
Dexterity bonus, how much from an amulet, what kind of bonus it is each time, etc.
This will be crucial to debugging the game and checking that abilities and items work
as intended.
(23) Detailed character sheet.
Likewise, the player’s character sheets must detail the computations involved in the
character’s AC, Attack bonus, saves etc.
(24) Inventory management.
The inventory management may be based solely on weight, or on weight and grid
geometry, with larger objects occupying more slots (in the style of Diablo or Neverwinter
Nights).
(25) Multiplayer (Optional)
If you are *really* in need of a challenge, you can implement a multiplayer mode so
that your friends can connect to your game and take control of some characters in the
party from their own machines.
85
For apprentices
(1) There is much less time dedicated to that project: 5 weeks in total. (end: at the end of
december).
439
(2) The level editor need not be fully functional. Do whatever you need so that you can
use it to create a few levels, but it need not be usable by the end user.
(3) The DnD aspect can be toned down considerable, or even done away with entirely, as
you will not (edit a year later: I never finished that sentence and somehow nobody noticed)
440
Figure 7: NASA’s ST5 satellite antenna, designed via evolutionary algorithms to meet the stringent
and very specific requirements of the mission. It is the first such object to have been sent to space
(2006).
441
Part XIII
Archived Project 2018–2019: Automata GUI
86
Vue d’ensemble
Le but du projet est de réaliser une application – avec interface graphique – pour la
construction de graphes orientés et de diagrammes sagittaux (co) d’automates d’états finis,
avec des facilités automatiques et semi-automatiques pour produire des diagrammes naturels,
plaisants, et lisibles, exportés au format LATEX/TikZ. Voyez les figures émaillant ce document
pour quelques exemples. (cp)
Cette application a pour vocation de venir en aide à la minorité peu considérée des professeurs
de théorie des langages, qui ont très envie d’illustrer leurs diapositives et polycopiés avec
de nombreux et beaux diagrammes, mais qui n’ont pas le luxe de passer à chaque fois une
heure à se reconnecter avec leur artiste intérieur afin de d’imaginer comment l’automate
devrait être disposé pour être “joli”, et encore une heure à se battre avec LATEX et TikZ pour
coder une version approximative de cette vision.
Ce document donne des pistes quant à ce qui est attendu, mais ne doit pas être abordé
comme une spécification exhaustive. Posez des questions !
Ceci est à réaliser en Python 3; le choix est ouvert pour la partie graphique, PyQt5 étant le
choix par défaut (cq).
Un prototype, réalisé dans le cadre du projet d’application en fin d’année par vos prédécesseurs,
est mis à votre disposition pour démarrer — mais rien ne vous empêche de recommencer à
zéro. C’est même fortement recommandé.
87
Qu’est-ce qu’un automate ?
On abordera le module de théorie des langages en seconde période. Pendant la première
moitié du projet, on verra donc les automates purement comme des diagrammes, et je ne
(co)i.e. diagrammes avec des ronds et des flèches. Même racine latine, sagitta, “flêche”, que le signe Sagittaire...
ici dans un contexte plus scientifique.
(cp)Sources:
mes
polys,
http://www.texample.net/tikz/examples/feature/
automata-and-petri-nets/,
https://www3.nd.edu/~kogge/courses/cse30151-sp18/Public/
Assignments/tikz_tutorial.pdf,
https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/148158/
make-a-tikz-automata-edge-pass-outside-the-automata,. . .
(cq)cf. http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/examples-graphicsview.html pour de la documentation C++.
C’est à
adapter à la version Python, car PyQt5 est juste une bibliothèque de liens (bindings) vers Qt5.
442
donnerai (à l’oral) qu’une vague intuition de leur sémantique – ce qu’ils “veulent dire”.
On aura malgré tout besoin de la définition formelle de la structure, afin d’avoir le vocabulaire
nécessaire pour communiquer.
Un automate fini non déterministe est un 5-uplet A = (Σ, Q, I, F, δ) où:
⋄Q: ensemble fini d’états
⋄Σ: alphabet fini
⋄I ⊆Q: états initiaux
⋄F ⊆Q: états terminaux
⋄δ ⊆Q × (Σ ∪{ε}) × Q: relation de transition
(p, a, q) ∈δ
notation
≡
p
a−→q
δ(p, a) = {q | p
a−→q}
Voici un petit diagramme sagittal d’automate, illustrant les différentes conventions de
représentation:
1
2
3
b
ε
a
a, c
a
L’alphabet est l’ensemble des étiquettes de transition, i.e. les lettres lues par l’automate. Le
symbole ε ne fait pas partie de Σ, il est utilisé pour une transition qui se déclenche sans rien
lire. On a
Σ = { a, b, c }
Les états sont les ronds:
Q = { 1, 2, 3 }
Les états initiaux sont indiqués par une flèche entrante déconnectée:
I = {1}
Les états finaux sont indiqués par un double cercle ou par une flèche sortante déconnectée:
F = { 1, 3 }
Notons qu’il n’est pas du tout classique d’utiliser ces deux conventions dans le même
automate; ou même dans le même document. L’automate ci-dessus commet donc une faute
de goût.
443
Restent les transitions:
δ = { (1, b, 2), (1, ε, 3), (2, a, 2), (2, a, 3), (2, c, 3) }
Faites le même exercice avec les automates suivants:
q0
q1
q2
0
1
1
0
1
q1
q2
q3
0
1
1
0
0, 1
a
c
b
a
88
Partie graphique / manuelle
Difficulté modérée; progression incrémentale; programmation objet; algorithmique simple; travail de
documentation bibliothèques Python, LATEX, TikZ. Groupe de 3 recommandé.
Réaliser un diagramme sagittal d’automate est largement une activité de dessin, régie en
partie par des considérations purement esthétiques et en partie par des conventions et
habitudes liées au domaine scientifique et favorisant la lisibilité des diagrammes.
Le point de départ de l’application est donc in fine un logiciel de dessin vectoriel assez
ordinaire, grandement simplifié par le faible nombre de figures de base dont on a besoin:
flèches, droites ou incurvées, cercles simples et doubles, étiquettes en langage mathématique
(entrée en LATEX), et c’est tout.
444
Le logiciel utilisera le vocabulaire “automates” et non le vocabulaire “dessin”, par exemple
“état” et non “cercle”. Si un jour il nous vient l’envie d’avoir des états rectangulaires, cela
doit être possible...
Placer des états et définir des transitions doit être aussi simple et rapide que possible pour
l’utilisateur .
Notons que, bien que les noms des états soient arbitraires, on voudra parfois les nommer
par des formules.
Par exemple, l’automate suivant est obtenu via un algorithme de
déterminisation, et il est essentiel de pouvoir faire apparaître les sous-ensembles dans les
états afin d’illustrer la démarche:
∅
{1}
{2}
{1, 2}
{3}
{1, 3}
{2, 3}
{1, 2, 3}
a, b
a
b
a
b
a, b
b
a
a
b
a
b
a
b
De même, dans l’automate suivant, ce sont les transitions qui portent des étiquettes un peu
“compliquées”, et pas seulement une seule lettre — pour ceux que ça intéresse il s’agit ici en
fait d’une machine de Turing:
qa
qb
qd
qc
qe
0,1,L
1,1,R
1,1,L
0,1,L
0,1,L
1,0,R
1,1,R
0,1,R
1,0,R
Il n’est pas totalement nécessaire que les formules mathématiques soient rendues correctement
dans l’interface graphique – le code LATEX peut être conservé tel-quel jusqu’à l’export vers
445
LATEX/TikZ. Ce serait toutefois appréciable si les formules pouvaient être rendues directement
dans l’interface. Si c’est le cas, il faut toutefois que l’utilisateur puisse désactiver cette
fonctionnalité, car le rendu dépend du contexte d’évaluation (LATEX est essentiellement un
langage de programmation) et le code de l’utilisateur peut donc ne prendre sens qu’au sein
de son document.
Ceci peut poser certains problèmes au moment d’évaluer la taille des états, par exemple.
A vous de proposer des solutions pour gérer ces cas de la manière la plus automatique et
flexible possible.
Ces briques de base, ronds et flèches, doivent pouvoir être manipulées à la fois finement et
semi-automatiquement.
Par “semi-automatiquement”, j’entends par exemple l’alignement sur une grille – ou
plusieurs grilles – et la disposition de tout ou partie des états selon certains schémas; par
exemple, voici un automate contenant plusieurs sous-figure régulières: deux en disposition
linéaire, et deux en cercles (ou pentagones en l’occurrence).
s
2
3
4
15
16
17
18
19
t
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
L’interface doit permettre à l’utilisateur de réaliser semi-automatiquement ce type de figure.
Spécifiquement l’utilisateur doit être capable de sélectionner des groupes de noeuds et de
les arranger selon des figures géométriques régulières telles que des lignes, des cercles, et
cetera.
Les arrangements faisant partie d’une telle figure géométrique – que l’on appellera un groupe
– doivent pouvoir être sélectionnés et déplacés collectivement. On doit aussi pouvoir régler
les paramètres de chacun; par exemple le diamètre d’un groupe déjà défini doit pouvoir être
modifié par la suite. De plus, plusieurs groupes doivent aisément pouvoir être uniformisés
– par exemple, leur donner le même diamètre, placer leur centre de gravité à des endroits
alignés horizontalement ou verticalement, etc.
Les éléments doivent aussi pouvoir être manipulés finement; par exemple, on a finement
déformé la transition de 3 à 10 pour éviter le premier pentagone; dans l’automate suivant,
on doit pouvoir déformer la transition de q1/0 à q′
3/1 de manière à éviter le croisement,
446
obtenant ainsi la nouvelle transition en rouge.
q0/ϵ
q′
0/1
q1/0
q2/1
q3/0
q′
3/1
a
b
a
b
a
b
a
b
a
b
a
b
89
Import et export
L’application devra pouvoir sauvegarder et restaurer ses diagrammes dans un format au
moins partiellement lisible par l’être humain et proche du formalisme A = (Σ, Q, I, F, δ) –
avec bien sur quelques informations supplémentaire d’ordre cosmétique, telles que couleurs,
courbure, localisation (x, y), etc.
Au delà de cela, il est absolument essentiel qu’elle soit capable d’exporter au format TikZ. La
qualité de l’export TikZ est un facteur important, car l’utilisateur aura peut-être envie de
retoucher le code généré.
Comme exemple de code TikZ, l’automate
1
2
3
b
ε
a
a, c
a
est codé par
\begin{tikzpicture}[fst]
\node[state, initial above, accepting] (1) {$1$};
\node[state, below left of=1] (2) {$2$};
\node[state, below right of=1, accepting right] (3) {$3$};
\draw
447
(1) edge[above] node{$b$} (2)
(1) edge[below, bend right, left=0.3] node{$\eps$} (3)
(2) edge[loop left] node{$a$} (2)
(2) edge[below] node{$a, c$} (3)
(3) edge[above, bend right, right=0.3] node{$a$} (1);
\end{tikzpicture}
qui est assez lisible et descriptif. Le paramêtre fst (pour Finite-State Transducer) est un
style personnalisé défini dans ce document.
Il y a bien d’autres façons de coder cette figure, telle qu’un matrice, ou des positions (x, y)
dans le plan explicites. Une grande flexibilité au niveau de la génération du code final est
attendue.
À vous de vous documenter sur LATEX et TikZ pour voir les différentes possibilités offertes par
ces langages. L’application doit en tirer parti autant que faire se peut, afin que le diagramme
final puisse être ajusté le plus finement possible avant l’export, et minimiser les besoins en
retouches au niveau du code généré.
Au delà de la figure, on doit aussi pouvoir exporter du code LATEX pour la définition formelle
de l’automate sous forme A = (Σ, Q, I, F, δ). Les transitions doivent pouvoir être générées
sous forme d’ensemble, comme plus haut, ou sous forme de tableau de transition.
90
Partie automatique
Difficulté élevée (pour obtenir de bons résultats); algorithmique poussée; recherche documentaire;
réflexion poussée. Groupe de 3 recommandé.
Même avec une bonne interface graphique, tous ces choix et ajustements esthétiques prennent
énormément de temps. Du point de vue de l’utilisateur final, la partie “dessin manuel” de
l’application est donc à réserver pour les figures importantes, qui doivent être réalisées avec
une qualité parfaite.
Dans la plupart des cas, l’utilisateur veut juste définir son automate “en vrac” et en quelques
clics, appuyer sur un bouton et obtenir instantanément une (ou plusieurs) proposition
de diagramme, calculées programmatiquement, qui soient d’une qualité passable. Ceci
implique de minimiser les croisements (pas toujours possible à éviter entièrement – on verra
au second semestre la notion de graphe planaire, et le fait que tous les graphes ne sont pas
planaires), de disposer les états à intervales réguliers de façon à assurer un “niveau de gris”
homogène dans la figure, etc.
Il existe de nombreuses techniques spécifiques au dessin automatique de graphes, ainsi
que des métaheuristiques générales potentiellement applicables, telles que les algorithmes
révolutionnaires / génétiques, le recuit simulé, et les colonies de fourmis, pour n’en citer que
448
quelques-unes.
Mettre en oeuvre ces méthodes nécessitera un gros travail de recherche documentaire et de
réflexion poussée pour comprendre des concepts difficiles au niveau 3A.
À ceci s’ajoute une difficulté supplémentaire: il ne s’agit pas de n’importe-quels graphes,
mais d’automates; les conventions de dessin ne sont pas les mêmes; utiliser un algorithme
de dessin arborescent ou fractal donnerait généralement des résultats peu appropriés, même
s’ils peuvent être “jolis”. On voudra généralement partir de l’état initial, aller plutôt de
gauche à droite et de haut en bas, disposer les états sur une grille, sauf certains cycles et
autres motifs à détecter et à mettre en exergue, et ainsi de suite.
Il n’y a pas (ou peu) de littérature disponible sur le sujet spécifique “comment dessiner des
automates”. Les dessins sont faits par les scientifiques “au feeling”, influencés par l’habitude
et le mimétisme sans que les conventions soient verbalisées.
Dans cette partie du projet, il vous appartiendra d’inférer une partie de ces conventions à
partir d’exemples, de les verbaliser, et de les programmer.
Un mode interactif, permettant à l’utilisateur de fournir certaines informations sémantiques
à l’application pour guider ses choix (par exemple, ce groupe d’états va ensemble, cet état
est important, etc), ou bien de choisir entre plusieurs alternatives (algorithme évolutionnaire
avec sélection (semi-)manuelle, est à considérer.
De plus, ces outils doivent pouvoir être appliqués semi-automatiquement au cours de
l’utilisation de l’interface pour faciliter la vie de l’utilisateur – par exemple, en détectant
automatiquement quand une nouvelle transition est créée si elle croise quelque-chose, auquel
cas elle sera créée courbe et non droite, ou bien en offrant des suggestions d’agencements
dans la marge, applicables en un clic, etc.
La partie du rapport consacrée à ces réflexions doit être assez détaillée.
91
Répartition des tâches
Il est conseillé de procéder par groupes de 6, par exemple en deux trinômes, un pour la partie
manuelle et l’import / export, et l’autre pour la partie automatique.
Dans ce cas, les trinômes doivent évidemment communiquer et intégrer leur code au projet
commun de façon très régulière – les tâches ne sont pas indépendantes et la répartition
ci-dessus n’est qu’une suggestion.
Il a été noté que l es deux partie sont de difficultés et de natures différentes, la partie manuelle
étant colorée “développeur” et l’autre “recherche”.
Choisissez bien la partie sur laquelle vous travaillerez en fonction de vos goûts et de vos
capacités.
449
La partie automatique peut potentiellement déboucher sur une très bonne solution (et donc
une note stratosphérique) en deux semaines de réflexion et 200 lignes de code,. . . mais vous
pouvez tout aussi bien passer un semestre à pondre 10 000 lignes de code produisant une
bouillie infâme et inexploitable, de valeur 0.
En revanche, la partie manuelle est difficile à rater si on travaille régulièrement, (mais il
faudra pondre beaucoup de lignes que l’on ait les bonnes idées ou pas).
Pour minimiser le risque d’avoir une mauvaise note individuelle sur la partie automatique
en cas d’échec, il serait une bonne idée de contribuer un peu à l’interface graphique. Les cas
simples comme la détection de croisement sont idéaux pour cela.
Il est bon également que tout membre du groupe ait une vue d’ensemble de l’application,
même des parties écrites par les autres.
450
Figure 8: De droite à gauche: remontoir, roue de couronne, rochet et son cliquet, barillet,
diverses roues, certaines portant des aiguilles, roue d’échappement, ancre de balancier, bal-
ancier et son ressort. Voir l’animation sur https://scratch.mit.edu/projects/26004123/
#fullscreen, et la vidéo https://www.wimp.com/1949-how-a-watch-works/.
Part XIV
Archived Project 2017–2018: Mon(s)tres
92
Vue d’ensemble
Le but de ce projet, à réaliser en Python 3 par groupes de 4 à 6, est de réaliser un générateur
automatique de mécanismes horlogers pour montres mécaniques doté, de plus, d’une
b
b
a
c
Figure 9: Une alternative au balancier: l’échappement à ancre, utilisant un pendule.
451
fonction de visualisation.
La génération se fera au moyen d’algorithmes évolutionnaires, une classe de métaheuristiques
qui imite l’évolution biologique pour résoudre des problèmes complexes pour lesquels une
approche directe (résolution d’équations) n’est pas faisable, et où l’espace de recherche
est trop grand pour une approche par force brute. Plus spécifiquement, on utilisera des
algorithmes génétiques.
Le principe est le suivant: nous générons aléatoirement une population de montres... ou
plutôt de monstres, car un mécanisme généré aléatoirement a peu de chances d’être utile
pour savoir l’heure... Cette population est ensuite soumise à des conditions de sélection,
telles que les monstres qui sont de meilleures montres – i.e. qui sont plus utiles pour mesurer
le passage du temps, ou plus efficaces – ont de meilleures chances de se reproduire, et moins
de périr. Quelques mutations peuvent aussi avoir lieu. Après de nombreuses générations,
on doit obtenir d’excellentes montres.
93
Les sous-problèmes
93.1
La modélisation des monstres
On impose une abstraction au niveau des pièces d’horlogerie: nos monstres évoluent dans
une soupe primordiale de remontoirs, roues dentées (faisant office de rochet, couronnes,
etc. On considère que toutes les roues ont entre 3 et 1000 dents, identiques pour toutes les
roues sauf l’échappement (cr)), roues d’échappement (si l’on veut la considérer séparément,
ce qui est conseillé), ancres, balanciers, ressorts (on pourra considérer un ressort comme
un ressort moteur ou un ressort de balancier), tiges (pouvant faire office d’aiguilles ou de
tiges de pendule). Le boîtier est considéré comme une pièce toujours présente. On ignorera
totalement les frottements.
Selon les ambitions de votre groupe, vous pourrez choisir d’ignorer totalement les consid-
érations d’espace:
93.1.1
Mode connexion libre
Chaque pièce peut se connecter à n’importe-quelle autre pièce à certains points de connexion:
par exemple, une roue dentée peut se connecter sur son axe, et sur ses dents. Si une roue
dentée se connecte à une autre sur leurs dents, on s’attend à ce que l’une entraîne l’autre; si
elles se connectent sur leurs axes, on obtient un pignon. Rien n’empêche une troisième roue
de se connecter sur le même axe.
(cr)On pourra tout de même aussi considérer la roue d’échappement comme une roue dentée ordinaire dans
un premier temps, pour simplifier.
452
Une tige peut se connecter aux deux bouts; par exemple, une tige connectée au boîtier à un
bout et à n’importe-quel autre objet, par exemple une roue, à l’autre bout, forme un pendule.
Une tige connectée à un axe de roue dentée d’un côté, et libre de l’autre, fait office d’aiguille.
En revanche, connecter une tige aux dents d’une roue stoppe le mécanisme.
Une ancre peut se connecter aux dents (à une roue d’échappement), et sur son axe, par
exemple à un balancier ou à une tige.
Un ressort spirale peut se connecter en son centre et à son extrémité; par exemple, un ressort
connecté à deux roues dentées coaxiales, l’une par le centre, l’autre par les dents (on imagine
que le ressort se connecte sous les dents), forme un début de moteur.
Un remontoir peut se connecter sur l’axe ou sur les dents d’une roue, avec les mêmes effets.
A vous de définir le reste des règles de connexion entre les pièces, et de prévoir leurs effets.
93.1.2
Mode 2D 1
2:
Le mode précédent ignore un certain nombre de problèmes. Il n’est en réalité pas immédiat
de connecter n’importe quelle pièce à n’importe quelle autre. Par exemple, les roues dentées
ne sont pas de taille arbitraire: comme les dents doivent être compatibles pour les roues
connectées entre elles, le nombre de dents est proportionnel à la circonférence, et il n’est
donc pas possible d’en varier la taille arbitrairement. Pour connecter deux roues distantes
entre elles, on doit souvent avoir recours à des pignons fous. Le mode précédent, ignorant
de tous ces aspects, va donc résulter en des constructions dignes d’Escher, impossibles à
mettre en oeuvre sans rajouter des composants pour assurer les liaisons.
En mode 2D1
2, les pièces posséderont des dimensions largeur/hauteur, et on les placera sur
un plan; on aura également besoin d’une dimension de profondeur, discrète. Par exemple,
une roue avec pignon occupe deux plans superposés: un pour la roue, et un pour le pignon.
Un moteur occupe au moins trois étages, un pour chaque roue et un pour le ressort. Les
connexions se feront lorsque les pièce sont situées approximativement au bon endroit pour
se toucher.
93.1.3
Que choisir ?
Le premier mode sera a priori plus aisé à mettre en œuvre du point de vue des algorithmes
évolutionnaires – il y moins de possibilités – mais obtenir des visualisations intéressantes
sera nettement plus difficile.
93.2
Mutation, sélection, reproduction
Pour utiliser des algorithmes génétiques, il ne suffit pas de savoir comment représenter
les monstres eux-mêmes (le phénotype), mais il faut aussi décider d’un codage génétique
de cette représentation: le génotype d’un monstre. C’est ce génotype qui est l’objet des
croisements et mutations qui donnent son pouvoir à la méthode.
453
La choix du génotype vous est laissé. Pour des connections libres, une simple matrice
d’adjacence peut faire l’affaire. Dans tous les cas, on peut aussi avoir une représentation en
chaîne binaire, éventuellement découpée en chromosomes – c’est la méthode classique.
Il faudra ensuite définir comment fonctionnent les accouplements (enjambements en un
point, en deux, uniformes, semi-uniformes ?), les mutations, et la sélection (par rang,
proportionnelle,... taille de la population, etc).
Il est très fortement conseillé d’implémenter vos propre algorithmes plutôt que d’utiliser
une bibliothèque toute faite. Tous ces choix de modélisation devront être faits quoi qu’il
arrive, et vous devrez savoir les argumenter dans tous les cas.
Il est essentiel que le phénotype puisse être calculé assez rapidement à partir du génotype, car
il faut bien l’évaluer (section suivante), et ce de très nombreuses fois. Il s’agit là d’une étape
de calcul qui peut gagner énormément à être parallélisée (sur machine multi-processeur;
faire ça sur de multiples machines est hors cadre ce semestre).
93.3
La mesure d’un monstre
La survie d’un monstre dépend de son utilité en tant qu’instrument de mesure du temps. Il
s’agit de simuler un environnement hostile aux monstres qui ne sont pas ponctuels; c’est ici
que nous allons injecter quelques connaissances d’horlogerie et nos conceptions subjectives
de ce qui fait une bonne montre. On doit écrire une fonction – utilité, ou fitness – attribuant
un score à chaque monstre, qu’on cherche à maximiser.
Il est important que ce score soit assez fin pour détecter de petites améliorations.
On supposera toujours la présence d’un boîtier, mais un boîtier seul ne sert strictement à
rien.
Une roue dentée, connectée au boîtier sur son axe, est un peu meilleure. On peut lui donner
une impulsion et attendre qu’elle s’arrête pour mesurer un intervalle de temps. C’est pénible
mais très légèrement mieux que rien.
Un ressort tout seul peut jouer un rôle similaire; on attend qu’il finisse de vibrer.
Un pendule est nettement mieux: on peut compter les secondes tranquillement, pendant un
temps raisonnable.
Un moteur avec un système d’échappement est nettement mieux qu’un pendule, car il va
durer beaucoup plus longtemps (durée à calculer). Il est aussi moins encombrant, et peut se
déplacer.
Mais tout ça est limité, car il faut garder l’œil sur le dispositif, seconde après seconde, et
c’est peu lisible. Si une aiguille tourne avec, c’est mieux. Si plusieurs aiguilles tournent
à des rythmes différents, c’est mieux. Si leurs rythmes se rapprochent d’une rotation par
minute, heure, et jour, c’est encore mieux. Si en plus on a aussi semaine / mois, etc, c’est
encore mieux.
454
Figure 10: Antenne ST5 de la NASA, obtenue via algorithmes évolutionnaires; premier objet
créé de cette manière à aller dans l’espace (2006).
Si on a moins de pièce, ceteris paribus c’est mieux. En particulier, on ne veut pas 50 moteurs
à remonter. Mais attention, ceci doit rester un critère secondaire, sinon aucun mécanisme
complexe n’aura le temps d’évoluer.
De même, si le mécanisme est plus compact, ceteris paribus c’est aussi mieux (en particulier
pour la représentation 2,5D) – une roue à 1000 dents n’est pas indiquée pour une montre-
bracelet.
Et ainsi de suite.
En revanche, on ne trichera pas en récompensant des étapes intermédiaires pour des
engrenages complexes qu’on a déjà en tête. La NASA n’aurait pas obtenu l’antenne ST5
(cf. figure) s’ils avaient dressé leurs algos à imiter leurs ingénieurs.
L’exercice consiste donc principalement d’une part à simuler le comportement d’un mé-
canisme donné (calculer la vitesse de rotation des pièces), et d’autre part à détecter les
configurations qui nous plaisent et déplaisent, en choisissant judicieusement les poids pour
chaque critère.
Ce calcul va être réalisé de très nombreuses fois; il est donc impératif qu’il soit très efficace.
Encore une fois, on va négliger les frottements et l’usure.
93.4
Stockage des populations
Les calculs étant longs, il est nécessaire de pouvoir les interrompre et les reprendre sans
crainte. Il faudra donc pouvoir sauvegarder (et charger) la population en cours et quelques
statistiques pertinentes des générations précédentes. Par exemple, les stats de fitness au
cours du temps, et les meilleurs individus de chaque génération.
Il serait aussi bon de pouvoir fusionner des populations enregistrées pour former une
nouvelle population initiale.
455
93.5
Visualisation graphique des monstres
Il va bien falloir jeter un œil aux monstres pour évaluer et exploiter les résultats produits, car
personne ne va s’amuser à lire une matrice d’adjacence ou un code binaire. Ce n’est donc
pas du tout optionnel.
Un graphe indiquant la connexion entre les pièces est un strict minimum, mais l’on attend
plutôt un schéma ou un dessin décrivant le mécanisme de façon aussi claire et proche de la
réalité que possible; cf. les deux premières figures. Ceci est bien plus aisé dans le mode 2.5D;
on peut imaginer un découpage niveau par niveau. Si on peut faire ça en vraie 3D, encore
mieux. (cs) C’est interactif ? Mieux. Animé ? Encore mieux.
La visualisation doit absolument être capable d’indiquer la vitesse de rotation de chaque
composant, et ce de manière claire et lisible; cette fonction doit pouvoir être activée et
désactivée.
93.6
Interfaces graphique et ligne-de-commande
Il faut absolument avoir une interface ligne de commande claire, robuste et bien documentée
permettant de lancer, sauvegarder, et charger des évolutions, ainsi de de visualiser les
meilleurs individus d’une population (en ouvrant une fenêtre graphique et/ou en générant
un fichier graphique).
Il est aussi bon que le programme ait une GUI (ct) permettant de visualiser en temps réel
l’évolution de la population et ses meilleurs individus, et si possible d’ajuster les poids de
certains critères en temps réel, tels que l’importance de la compacité du mécanisme.
94
Répartition des tâches
Il est conseillé de procéder par groupes de 6, par exemple en trois binômes focalisés sur les
trois parties principales:
⋄Algos génétiques (choix de génôme, mutation, crossover, parallélisation des calculs
(multi-processeurs)...),
⋄Évaluation des monstres (horlogerie / simulation, fonction de fitness)
⋄Interface graphique, interactivité, et visualisation.
D’autres tâches annexes sont à répartir entre les membres: e.g. stockage et gestion des
populations, ligne de commande. . .
(cs)Uniquement si on n’a rien d’autre à faire. VPython est une bonne bibliothèque, mais n’est pas compatible
avec les dernières versions de Python3. On ne s’engagera dans la 3D que si on a déjà une bonne visualisation
par ailleurs, ou alors si on a déjà beaucoup d’expérience de la 3D en Python.
(ct)PyQt, PyGTK, TkInter,. . . au choix
456
Les binômes doivent communiquer et intégrer leur code au projet commun de façon très
régulière – les tâches ne sont pas indépendantes et la répartition ci-dessus n’est qu’une
suggestion. Le choix de modélisation des monstres doit être fait au plus tôt, et concerne tout
le monde.
457
